--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-091.png ---
County of Cavan. 71

Queen Elizabeth, February Ist, 1570, granted the abbey,
with all its possessions, to Hugh O'Reilly of the Brenie,
head of his sept, for the term of 21 years, at the rent of
fifty-five shillings and eight-pence, Irish money; but by an
inquisition taken in the 27th of the same reign, the said
Hugh was found to be eleven years and an half in arrear.”

Mounterconaght, in the barony of Castleraghen. There
was an endowed hospital here; King James granted a lease
of it, for the term of 21 years, to Sir Edward Moore, at
the rent of fifteen-pence’ See Ballylinch.

Inquisition 9th of September, 1590, finds that the following
Hospitals in this county were endowed with lands, called
Tearmonlands, as follow :—Annagha, one pole or cartron of
land, annual value 12¢.; Annaghgalve, half a cartron of land,
annual value 6¢.; Balliclamy Phillip, three cartrons of land,
annual value 3s.; Ballientemple, two cartrons of land, annual
value 2s.; Ballimachinghe, three acres, annual value 3a. ;
Casheltarra, three cartrons of land, annual value 3s. 9@.;
Castlerahin, two cartrons of land, annual value 2s.; Cavan,
monastery, half a cartron of land, annual value 3s. 4d. ;
Clona, one acre of land, annual value td.; Clonkyaghvoy,
four cartrons of land, annual value 4s.; Cloonosa, two cart-
rons of land, annual value 8s.; Crosserboghe, four cartrons
of land, annual value 4s.; Dromgowne, two cartrons of land,
annual value 2s.; Dromkeman, one cartron of land, annual
value 12d.; Drombane, thirty-two cartrons of land, annual
value, besides reprises, 32s.; Dronge, one cartron and half of
land, annual value 1s. 6¢.; Dronnegrasse, one cartron of land,
annual value 12d. ; Dynn, eight cartrons of land, annual value
8s.; Inneskin, two cartrons of land, annual value 2s.; Kil-
brode, half a cartron of land, annual value 6¢.; Kilconny,
one cartron of land, annual value 12d¢.; Kildallan, two
cartrons of land, annual value 2s.; Kildromfeart, eight cart-
rons of land, annual value 8s.; Kileynagh, one cartron of
land, annual value 12d.; Kilfert, two cartrons of land, annual
value 2s.; Kilinekeire, two cartrons of land, annual value 2s. ;

"King, p. 203. "Lodge, vol. 1. p. 316.

the Life of St.Fechin of Fore: “on a certain day St. Fechin came to the place,
called Snam-luthir in the district of Caerbre-Gabhra: and meeting there St.
Colman, son of Eochaidh, who had been for a long time blind, he applied to
his eye the water with which he had washed his hands, and the blessing of
sight was immediately restored to the blind man.” (Acta SS. page 136.) The
second miracle was performed by St. Ruadhan of Lorrha: “St. Ruadhan coming
to the city called Snam-Luthir in the district Gabhra Carbre, the body of the
lately deceased King of that district was being borne on a chariot towards the
city, and the whole ple were weeping around him. Then Ruadhan, moved
to compassion, prayed to the Lord, and the King rose up living and offered that
city and people to’St. Ruadhan.” (Acta Bolland, April, vol. 2, page 383.)

