--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-163.png ---
County of Cork. 137

Franciscan Monastery ; was founded in this town under the
invocation of St. Brigid by Cormac M‘Carthuigh, the Great,
Prince of Desmond, in the year 1465.8 He was murdered by
Owen his brother,’ and was buried here in the middle of the
choir, with the following inscription on his tomb:

Hic jacet Cormacus fil. Thadei, fil. Cormaci, fil. Dermitii
magni M‘Carthy, Dnus. de Musgraigh Flayn ac istius con-
ventus primus fundator. an. Dom. 1494.°

Thomas O’Herlihy, bishop of Ross, was interred here in
1579.° and the Roman Catholics repaired this house in 1604.

A great part of this building still remains, with the nave
and choir of the church ; on the south side of the nave is an
handsome arcade of three Gothic arches, supported by marble
columns, more massive than those of the Tuscan order; this

* Act. SS., p. 1§. > War. Annal. ° War. Mss., vol. 34, p. 164. * War. Bps.
Pp: $88 * Smith, vol. 2, p. 101.

Abrath, in Sliabh Cain, Finan Cam Chind Ettig, in the boundary of Ely and Fer-
cell; Senan of Inis Cathaigh; these are the three luminaries of the race of
Conaire.
“* Nine persons of the race of Conaire,
By learned persons called
Three lights, three seniors, three virgins,
Commemorated by the learned sages.

‘* These are the three seniors
Who spoke with Christ in conversation—
Senach, son of Cairill, without tribulation,
Eolaing, and Odran.

“ These are the three Caz/echs (nuns)
Who freely gave their love to Christ—
Ciarascach, Gobinait, with devotion,
And Sciach, daughter of Meachair.

“« These are the three lights
Who saved middle Munster—
Lachtain, the fair, the good instructor,
Finan Cam, and Senan.

“ Senan of Sliabh Luimnigh, whois not weak,
Lachtain from Bealach Abrath,
With the King of the elements, a deed not concealed,
And Finan-Cam-Chind-Ettig.

“« They are alike in state with the King of Heaven,
Alike their right and their family,
Alike the union they have consummated
In heaven and on earth,” &c., &c.

The seven sons of Torben, son of Nuachadh, #.¢., Lilan. from Ath-na-Ceall, on
the brink of Abhan Mor (Blackwater) ; Silen and Cellan, from Ath-na-Ceall also;
Senan Liath, from Cill T-Senain Leith ; Trian, from Domnach Mor Muscraidhe
Mittaine ; Mochoba, from Lismore ; Crocho. from Cill Crochan, in the boundary
of Leix and Ossory ; Lachtain, from Achad Ur, in Aes Chind Chaille, in Ossory
also. The seven daughters of Torben were, Coirsech, Cersech, Sodelb, Cellsech,
from Ath-na-g-cell, &c., &c., Xc.

