--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-269.png ---
County of Dowe. 237

Francis should immediately take possession of it, which was ac-
cordingly done,says Wadding, by Father Nicholasofthat Order.™

A small part of the ruins of this abbey still remain; the
windows were of the ancient narrow Gothic kind, &c., and the
traces of the foundation show that the building was of a great
extent."

Black Abbey ,* has its situation two miles north of Bally-
halbert, in the Great Ardes, and was founded for Benedictin
monks by the celebrated Sir John de Courcey, who made it a
cell to the abbey of St. Mary at Lonley in Normandy, and in
the foundation charter he calls it the abbey of St. Andrew de
Stokes.?

A.D. 1210. Died Sir John, the founder? It is said by
some writers, that this priory was united to the archiepiscopal
see of Armagh, and that the archbishop, Richard Fitz-Ralph,
gave two hundred pounds sterling to the abbot of Lonley
for the confirmation thereof, in the reign of King Edward III.
But it is certain, that this house was seized into the King’s

™Allemande, ® Hist., County of Down, p. 64. Pococke's Journal. ° Mon. Angl.,
vol. 2, p. 1019. ¥ Lodge, vol. 4, p. 31-

4 Black Abbey.—Black Abbey was anciently styled ‘‘the Priory of St. Andrew,
in the Ardes.”—Mon. Angl. vol. ii., p. 1019. It gives name to the townland of
Black Abbey, in the parish of Grey Abbey, where it was situated, but not a vestige
of it now remains, and the only surviving relique of the establishment is an
ancient cuneiform sculptured tombstone which has been removed to Grey Abbey.

“The priory of St. Andrew, or, as it is sometimes styled, the Black Priory, in
the Ards, was founded by John de Courcy, about the year 1180, at which date he
granted ten carucates of land called Maccolloqua in the Ards, with certain tithes,
to the priory of St. Andrew de Stokes, or Stoke Courcy, which he had founded in
Somersetshire. By some arrangement, which is not recorded, this grant was trans-

- ferred to the priory of St. Mary of Lonley, in Normandy, and the priory of St.
Andrew's in the Ards, about 1218, was constituted by Hugh de Lacy a cell of that
house.”—(Harris’ ‘* Ware’s Works,” vol. ii., p. 273.) In 1342, during the war
between France and England, the temporalities of this house were seized, as
belonging to an alien pricry, into the King’s hands; but were, in the following
October, delivered to William de Hodierne, a monk of Lonley.—(King’s ‘‘ Col-
lection.”)

Not long afterwards. Richard FitzRalph, Archbishop of Armagh, entered into
an agreement with the prior and convent of Lonley for the purchase of the lands,
tithes, and privileges of the priory of St Andrew's, This took place in the year
1356, and the deed of assignment, which has been preserved, is printed in the
Monasticon Anglicanum.—(Vol. ii., p. 1019). At the same time the primate
bound himself to the abbot and convent of Lonley in the sum of £200, to be paid
to them or their attorney on or before the feast of St. John the Baptist, in the year
1360: provided that this transfer of the cell of St. Andrew in the Ard, in the
county of Ultonia, should be confirmed by the Pope, the King. and other the lords
and founders of said house, to him, his successors, and the church of Armagh.
That if such license should not be obtained, the premises were to be delivered
back in due form. Dated 20th [March], 1356. A copy of this bond is entered in
the register of Archbishop Sweteman, who succeeded FitzRalph in the primacy,
and is, perhaps, the oldest record on paper now existing in Ireland Fol. 16 b.)
An inspeximus of the same document is preserved among the Rolls of Chancery of
Ireland (Calend., p. 140, No. 123.) Richard FitzRalph died on the 16th Novem-
ber, 1360, and after his death the priory of St. Andrew was seized into the king's

