--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-329.png ---
County of Down. 291

1276. G——— was elected abbot.*

1296. 29th September, the King granted a license to this
convent, to re-purchase all such lands and tenements as they
had formerly possessed, but which had been alienated by the
predecessors of the abbot.*

1316. This abbey was plundered by Edward Bruce.»

1380. It was enacted that no mere Irishman should profess
himself here.* . :

1526. The abbot Glaisne, son of Hugh Magennis, was slain;
see Downpatrick.

This abbey, with two castles, a garden within the site there-
of, and three carucates in’Saul and Meritowne, alias Ballison-
nagh, were granted to Gerald Earl of Kildare ; see Lismullen,
in county of Meath.

Of this monastery large ruins still remain; there are yet
entire two vaulted rooms of stone, about seven feet high, six
long, and two and an half broad, with a small window in one side.

Sheve Donard,;® an high mountain in the barony of Upper
Iveagh.

St. Domangart, a disciple of St. Patrick, founded a noble
monastery at the foot of this mountain ; his festival is on the
4th of March. Yet the patron day seems to be July the 25th,
when the Roman Catholicks climb up the mountain to per-
form their penance.

Tamlachta Umhail near Lough Blisklau,* in the barony
of Iveagh.

"King, p. 191. * Prynne, vol. 3, p. 688. » Pembridge Ann. © King, p. 93.

1
4 Called in ancient times, Lough Brecreann or Bricirne.

Ina letter, dated Castlewellan, April 23rd, 1834, Dr.Q’ Donovan thus describes
the remains of the hermitage of St. Donard, or Domangart, perched on the high
mountain which still bears his name :—“ There are two circular cairns upon its
(Slieve Donard’s) summit, one to the N.E., the other tothe S.W. The form of
that to the N.E. is now much destroyed, and the well, which my guide informed
me, was springing in the centre of it, is filled with stones. This, he says, was done~
by sappers. If it were they who filled this, they seemed to have had very little to
do, but my opinion is, that it was done by some devout visitor, who thought that it
was his duty to destroy every vestige of superstition, The cairn to the S.W. is
much more perfect, but it is destroyed in a great measure to erect the Trigono-
metrical Station, which, in the course of ages, may puzzle antiquarians to discover
its scientific use. The well in this cairn is now dried up, and I scarcely believe
that it ever contained spring water. To the E. of the well is a stone which, to me,
appears to have been used by the Saint as an altar; and it would also appear
probable that he had roofed’this cairn and used it as a little chapel. This con-
Jecture is corroborated by the fact that Sir William Petty called it a chapel, and
Colgan a church. I am also of opinion that this cairn had been used as a Druidi-
cal place of worship, and that the hermit took advantage of the pile (as the sappers
have of the chapel) to form a little house and ‘a place of worship for himself and
his visitors.” —See Letters of Dr. O’Donovan to the Ordnance Survey Office. The
monastery at the foot of the mountain was at Maghera.

4\ Tamlachta Umhail seems to have been one of the ancient designations for a
church, which stood in the townland of Drumsallagh, a little to the west of the lake

