--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-098.png ---
78 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

St. Camin founded an abbey here, which was afterwards
a church, and still retains his name; he died in the year
653, and was buried in his own church; his feast is observed
on the 25th of March.*

St. Stellan, the abbot, died May the 24th, about three
years before St. Camin”

St. Coelan, a monk of this abbey, flourished about the end
of the 7th, or beginning of the 8th century. He wrote a
life of St. Brigid in Latin verse, in which he expressly tells
us, that this abbey was a convent of Benedictines.

Keltra est conventus rité virorum
Prudentum, sacro Benedicti dogmate florens.*

A. D. 834. This island was ravaged by the Danes, and
the same year it was destroyed with fire by Tomar, a Danish
commander from Limerick.*

1027. The great Brien Borombh, monarch of Ireland,
erected the church of Iniskeltair about this time.>

1040. Corcran was abbot of Iniskeltair; he was the most
celebrated ecclesiastic of the West of Europe, both for re-
ligion and learning, and died this year at Lismore.*

1043. Died St. Amnichad ; he was a disciple of the abbot
Corcran ; his feast is held January 30th?

1315. Brien O’Brien, brother to Donogh, King of Thom-
ond, was constrained to take shelter in this island.*

There yet remains here a fine round tower, with seven small
churches, which bespeak, in miniature, an elegance of taste.‘
This island is remarkable for the great resort of pilgrims
on certain festivals.

Inislua,® was called anciently Inisluaidhe, an island in the

Usher. Act, SS. p.746 747. TAct.SS.p..7. _*Tr. Th. £.594,598. *M'Geogh.
"Keating. *Act. SS. p. 206. “Calendar. Collect. vol. 1, 616. *O’Halloran,
p 81.

and a round tower, the principal church of the island is Zeampal Caimin, i. ¢.,
the on of St. Caimin,” who was a disciple of St. Senan. He died in the
ear je

"a we certainly a mistake to assert that ‘St. Senan of Carcabaiscini founded

a monastery here before the coming of St. Patrick into Munster,” for it fs admitted

by all historians that St. Senan of Inisscattery was yet unborn when St. Patrick

was preaching the Gospel in Munster, and the Irish life of St. Senanand the Tri-
artite life of St. Patrick agree that St. Patrick, when preaching to the men of

‘unster on Cruach Patraig.in the county of Limerick in the fourth year of his mis-
sion in Ireland, prophesied the coming of St. Senan, who was then (we are told)
in his mother’s womb.

O'Donovan notices this mistake in the Ordnance Survey Papers in the following
words :—‘‘ Inislua, it is one of the islands of the Shannon between Limerick an
Inisscattery. Archdall, following some foolish authorities, says (at Inislua) that
Senan founded a monastery there before Saint Patrick arrived in Munster. Har-
tis’ position, although not so absurd, is equally wrong,” &c. The same observa-
tions apply to Archdall's notice of Inisscattery. See Ordnance Survey Papers of
the County of Clare Royal Irish Academy, vol. i., p. 69, n. 13.

