--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-136.png ---
110 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

Cluain; Between the mountains Crot and Marige. St.
Sedna, a disciple of St. Senan of Iniscathy, governed a church
erected in this place; but he was buried at Kinsale’

This place and the following are now unknown.

Cluainfinglass ; An abbey was founded here by St. Abban,
A.D. 650."

Cork ,**® Is the second city in Ireland, and increasing every

¥ Act. SS. p. §73. *ld. p. 615. *Was called by the ancient Irish Corcach,
or Corcachbascoin, that is, a marshy place; the harbour they called Bealaghconliach.
Act. SS. p. 494-

44 Cluain.—This is probably the place referred to in the following passage of the
Irish life of St. Findbarr :—

“* After St. Barra had built the church of Achadh Duirbchon, near Cuas Barra, he
crossed the Abhan Mor to Cill-Cluana, and he built a church there, and remained
there for some time, till two pupils of St. Ruadan of Lothra, #.e., Cormac and
Baoithin came to him, and soon after Ruadan himself came to him there.. After
this, Ruadan’s pupils came to ask him for a place for themselves, and Ruadan
said to them: ‘Go forth to where the tongues of your bells will sound, and it is
in that place your resurrection will be on the last day, and remain in that place.’
They then went forth till they reached Cill Cluana (the Church of Cluain), where
Barra was, and the bells sounded there, and the clerics became very much dis-
heartened, as they did not expect to get this church or place. Barra saw this, and
said to them : ‘Be not disheartened,’ said he, ‘ for I will give up this church, and
all the wealth and property that belong to it, to God and to you ;’ and so Barra gave
his church to them, and the above-named clerics remained in that church. And
Barra built twelve churches more after this before he came to Cork, and gave them
all in charity and love of God. And he was then led by the angel to where Cork is
to-day, where he settled down in the seat of his resurrection.” —O' Curry, MS, C.U.I.

18 Cork.—The site of the present city of Cork was, in the beginning of the sixth
century, a low, marshy tract, through the centre of which flowed the waters of the Lee.
‘When this river overflowed its banks the whole country presented the appearance
of an immense lake, which was called in those early times Lough Eirce.

It was at the source of the river Lee, near Lough Allua, that St. Finbarr erected
his first cell; and to the present day that district, now situated in the parish of
Inchigeelagh, recalls his memory in the classic name of ‘‘ Gougane Barra,” which
means ‘the lonely retreat of St. Finbarr.” Thence, however, he soon removed to
the banks of Lough Eirce, and erected there his chief school and monastery, which
became so illustrious for its learning and sanctity, that innumerable students and
pi ims flocked to it from every part of our island. “Here in this solitude the saint
laid the foundation of his monastic establishment: it grew rapidly, became a crowded
city, a school for learning, a college for religion, a receptacle for holy men, a sanc-
tuary for the oppressed, an asylum for the poor, an hospital for the sick.”—{Had/’s
Treland, ii., 214.)

From the peculiarity of the site chosen for the monastery, the city received its
name of Corcach Bascain, or simply Corcach, that is, ‘a marsh.’

Colgan has given a short account of this famous school, and preserved the names
of some of the most illustrious saints who flourished there :—‘‘ After these things,
St. Barra came to a place which in the Irish language is called Loch-Erce, near
which he constructed a monastery, to which, as to the abode of wisdom, and sanc-
tuary of all Christian virtues, disciples flowed in crowds from every quarter in so
great numbers, through zeal of holiness, that, from the multitude of the monks and
cells, it changed that desert, as it were, into a large city: for from that school
which he instituted there, numerous men came, remarkable for holiness of life and
the praise of learning, amongst whom were conspicuous St. Eulangius or Eulogius,
the instructor of St. Barra himself, St. Colman, of Dore Dhunchon, St. Bathinus,
St. Nessan, St. Garbhan, son of Findbarr, St. Talmach, St. Finchad of Ross-
ailithir, St. Lucerus, St. Cumanus, St. Lochinus of Achadh-airaird, St. Carinus,

