--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-281.png ---
County of Down. 249

and W. prior of Cragfergus.—In another he granted the
tithe of all his hunting throughout his whole lands: Witness,
Will. prior of Cragfergus—In another, he granted the
power of holding a court, with certain privileges attending it,
and appointed D— to be then prior.—In another he confirmed
the donation which Amauric de Hanehhe had given of his
land of Ballcrou: Witness, Malachy, bishop of Down———
In another charter the prior is named Andrew ; and Sir John

Dun-da-leathghlas ; they slew Donnell, the grandson of Cathasuch, Lord of
Dalaradia. Dun-da-leathghlas was plundered and destroyed by John and the
knights who came in hisarmy. A castle was erected by him there, out of which
they defeated the Ulidians twice, and the Kinel-Owen and Oriels once, slew
Conor O’Carellan, chief of Clandermot, and Gilla-macliag O’Donnelly, chief of
Feardroma (in county Tyrone around Castlecaulfield), and Donnell O’Laverty,
chief of Clann-Hamill, in the county of Derry, was so wounded by arrows on this
occasion, that he died of his wounds in the Church of St. Paul, at Armagh, after
having received the Body and the Blood of Christ, and after extreme unction and
penance. Many other chieftains were also slain by them besides these.” John
de Courcy, a warlike but cruel man, set out from Dublin, with less than four
hundred men, in the month of January, A.D. 1177, and in four days arrived at
Downpatrick, without meeting an enemy to oppose him. The town, which was
taken by surprise, was given up to plunder, and the streets were wet with the
blood of the citizens. The Pope’s legate, having in vain endeavoured to prevail on
De Courcy to withdraw his soldiers, on condition that Rory MacDunlevey, King
of Ulidia, should pay tribute to the King of England, urged the native Prince to
defend his territories against the aggressors. In the meantime, according to the
Dublin copy of the Annals of Innisfallen, De Courcy erected a strong fort of
stones and clay at Down, and drew a ditch or wall from sea to sea, or, in other
words, he cut-a deep trench in front of the site of the present market house,
which completely insulated that portion of the town, which was afterwards called
“the English Quarter,” and which, probably, at that period constituted the entire
town. In order to defend the drawbridge which connected the insulated town
with the mainland, he erected a castle which stood at the junction of English-street
and Church-street. In the beginning of February, MacDunlevey collected in a
week, according to Giraldus, ten thousand warriors to attack the English, who
marched out of the town to meet them. Giraldus says the Ulidians, who, like
the northern inhabitants of every country, were the bravest of its people, fought
manfully with spears and battle-axes, but were defeated by the foreigners, who
mustered less than four hundred, a circumstance which, though it does not enhance
their bravery or their discipline, tende to lessen the credibility of Giraldus, who,
however, ascribes the victory of his countrymen to the direct interference of God.
The princes of the Kinel-Owen and Oriel, finding.that the common enemy was
approaching too near to their own confines, so far forgot their old enmity tothe

lidians as to muster all their available forces against the Normans. The united
forces, amounting to fifteen thousand men, sustained, on the 24th of June, 1177,
the crushing defeat mentioned in the extract already given from the ‘‘ Annals of
the Four Masters.” They seem to have been a multitude, without arms or discip-
line, opposed to the mail-clad Norman warriors ; or, as MacNamee, the poet of
Kinel-Owen, speaking of another battle, fought at Down, says :—

“ Unequal they engaged in battle,
The foreigners and the Gael of Tara ;
Fine linen shirts on the Race of Con,
And the foreigners in one mass of iron.”

In this battle, according to the Annals of Inisfallen, ‘‘the Archbishop of Armagh,
the Bishop of Down, and all the clergy were taken prisoners, and the English got
possession of the croziers of St. Comgal] (founder of Bangor), and St. Dachiarog

