--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-306.png ---
270 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

cated to St. Finian, adjoining which Magnell Makenlefe, King
of Ulster, on the 8th of September, A.D. 1126 or 1127,
founded an abbey for monks of the order of St. Benedict, and
called it the abbey of Carrig, from the rock on which it was
erected. St. Evodius was the first abbot ; and, on the day of
his decease, he gave directions that his corpse should be
interred in the Island of Inis, afterwards Iniscourcey, pro-
pheying that his own abbey would in aftertimes be destroyed,
but that one should be built on that island. This abbey
continued of the Benedictin order during the times of Odo,
Devincius, and John, the three succeeding abbots, but in the

the ruins of a church measuring forty by fifteen feet. Though these ruins are
remembered by old persons, and the west wall was Standing nine feet high within
the last fifty years, and interments even took place in the ancient cemetery in
1825, yet in about ten or twelve years after that date the walls were cleared away,
and the cemetery ploughed up. The history of the foundation of this church is
given in the ‘‘ Monasticon Anglicanum,” from the registry of Furness Abbey, in
Lancashire. It informsus that ‘‘a certain King of Ulster, named Magnellus
Makenlef, first founded it on the 8th of September, 1127, near the well of St.
Finian, in the land that is called Erynach, and named in the Abbey of Carrick.” It
afterwards informs us that ‘tits first abbot, the holy Evodius, on the day of his
death, commanded the brothers to bury his body in the Island of the Inch (Ynes),
and he assigned the reason, saying—‘ This house, brethren, shall be destroyed to
the foundation, and here in future will be the dwelling of wild beasts and robbers.
But in that place will be a college of just men, and the ascension of holy souls,
Here briars and thorns shall cover the barren soil.’ . . . . ” Weare then
told that after the death of its first abbot it was ruled successively by three abbots,
Odo, Devincius, and John, and that it was demolished by John de Courcey, in
consequence of its having been fortified against him, and that he afterwards built
the Abbey of Inch, and endowed it with the lands which had been bestowed on
the abbey of Carrick, by Magnellus. This ‘*Magnellus Makenlef’ is Niall
MacDonlevy (O'Eochaidh), a Prince of Ulidia, who was slain in the year 1127.
The monastery was named that of Carrick—‘‘the rock”—from a rock beside
which it had been built. At the base of this rock is the ancient well of St.
Finian, but a few months ago Thomas Patterson quarried away a portion of the
rock, and filled up the well, and has thereby destroyed one of the ancient historic
monuments of the country. Ona white portion of the rock, above the spot where
the well was, is still to be seen the print of the saint’s knees and feet. This
church was called by the people “Templenageerah” (Teampull-na-g-caerach),
“‘church of the sheep.” Though the monastery was destroyed by De Courcey,
the chapel remained. In the taxation of Pope Nicholas it is valued at six marks,
under the name of “the Chapel of the Greencestell,” called so because it was
attached to the Castle of Castlescreen, which was one of those castles which the
Anglo-Normans erected to guard their conquests in Lecale, and. like several of
the other castles in that barony, it was built within an Irish rath. Its name,
Greencastle, became in process of time cbanged into its present form, Castle-
screen. The ancient church stood in the townland of Erynagh, but near the
rivulet which divides it from the townland of Castlescreen. It is mentioned in
“ Primate Fleming’s Registry,” in a document relating to the year 1408, as “the
Chapel of St. Finian de Viridi Castro (Greencastle), and in a Chancery Roll of
1427 it is stated that lands in ‘‘ Greencastel in Comitatu de Lecale,” to distinguish
it from Greencastle in Mourne, had been held of Richard, Duke of York, by
Janico Dartas, from whom descended the Fitzgerald family, who still possess that
townland. At the dissolution it was appropriate to the Abbey of Saul, under
the name of ‘‘ Castlecryn,” as appears by an inquisition taken in the third year of
Edward VI., which retumed its valuation at 106s. 8d.

