--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-212.png ---
184 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

Domnachglinne Tochuir ,6) St. Patrick founded this church,
and made Maccarthen, brother to the Saint of Clogher, bishop
of it. This is now a parish church in Inisoen, and remarkable
for the great resort of pilgrims on St. Patrick’s day; there
is still preserved here the Saint’s penitential bed, and many

1 Was called anciently Domnach mor muighe tochuir.

forced toswim. All that night they were forced to stand to their arms ; next day
Sir Charles Coote appeared with his formidable army, and drew them up by a
Danish fort upon a narrow pass leading to Derry. The bishop also drew up
his army in battle array, both armies being within musket-shot of each other. Capt.
Taylor and Capt. Cathcart, two of the best horse officers the enemy had, marched
with two strong brigades of horse towards the rear of our army in a full career,
who were repulsed bravely by our horse and some foot, and beaten back into their
own body, with the loss of both their fine captains, which aided most of this day’s
action, both armies withdrawing till the fatal day at Letterkenny, some while after.
The enemy in this interval preparing and increasing till the last blow was given,
wherein we lost, after quarters given, Colonel Henry Roe O'Neil, Colonel Hugh
Maguire, Colonet Hugh McMahon, Art. Oge O'Neil, McShane Deveny, and
Colonel Phelim McTuol O'Neil. Quarters were made good to move but for
George Sexton, Quarter-Master General, who was put to death afterwards at
Carrickfergus by order of the High Court of Justice ; Major-General O’Cahan was
killed on the spot, with a great many prime officers, and about 1,500 private men ;
the bishop taken two days after by Major King, near Inniskillen, and executed
afterwards in Inniskillen. After this, every one shifted for himself the best he
could, except some parties who kept out about Sleive Russell, im Ulster, no
eneral protection granted.” The place occupied by the monastery of Conwall

as, as 1 remarked, been long used as a burial-place, but sadly neglected until the
present Bishop of Raphoe, Dr. McVevitt, a short time ago, repaired the wall
around it, furnished it with a fine gate, and, I believe, intends building a mortuary
chapel under the walls of the old monastery.

6 Domnagh-glinne Tochuir, This is another of the foundations of St. Patrick
in these parts. The fact is recorded in the second part of the Tripartite Life of
our National Apostle, chap. cxx., and as the narrative abounds in so much inte-
resting detail, I have thought it worthy of a place here. ‘‘ Returning,” the
writer is speaking of St. Patrick, ‘‘into the territory of Eugenius, which is called
Inis-Eoguin (the island of Eugenius), he came into that part of it which belonged
to Fergusius, the son of Eugenius, and there set about measuring at Achadb-
Droman, a site for a church, but Coelbadius, son of Fergusius, prevented him
and drove him off by violence. Whereupon St. Patrick foretold to him the
disagreeable news of his future punishment, and that one of his race should never
build a dwelling on that site. This prophecy was fulfilled soon after in the

son of Comanius, son of Algasacus, a descendant of the same Coelbadius, for

e began ta build a house at as-wrac-eric, but before he got the roof on, some
of the clergy belonging to the church of Domnach-Mor-Minghe Tochair pulled
it down and rooted up its very foundation. Aidius, the son of Caelbadius,
grieved at the treatment St. Patrick received from his father Coelbadius, went to
the Saint, and pressed him to accept a site for a church in his territory which was.
separated from his brother's patrimony neither by wall nor mound. St. Patrick
readily accepted the kind and pious offer, and at once set about measuring the
site, and laying the foundation of the Church of Domnach-Mor Minghe Tochnir,
in the disposition and arrangement of which he spent forty days, and then leav-
ing therein as bishop, Maccarthen, one of his own disciples, he proceeded east-
wards to Bredach, and there established the Church of Afach-Bile or Moville.”

The spot on which St. Patrick ventured at first _to lay the foundation of this
Church, and from which he was violently thrust by Coelbadius, was, according to
the account given above, close to Zas Mac Eric. According to O'Donovan,
Eas Mac Eric is a ledge of rock in the channel of a river, over which the flood
bounds to precipitate itself again into a basin below. The river, with this inter~
ruption in its channel, still courses through a district in Inishowen. It rises at

