--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-070.png ---
50 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

Franciscan Friary™ The friars of the order of St. Francis
were brought into this town A.D. 1261,P and Patrick Scanlain,
who was then primate, built a house for them two years after ;4
though Wadding, the Franciscan, as quoted by Allemande,
assures us, that it was founded in the year 1291, by O'Donnell."

Michael, the divinity lecturer, was elected archbishop in

1303.*

A.D. 1353. Gormlagh, the daughter of J. O’Donnell, and
formerly wife of Donald O'Neil, prince of Ulster, dying on
the 14th of April, was buried in this monastery.*

The Franciscans of the strict observance began to reform
this friary in 1518," but it was not then perfected. In 1580,
Walter M‘Cuard was guardian,” and in 1583, Solomon M‘Conny
was guardian, in whose time the reformation was completed.*

Clonfeakle. St. Lugud, or Lugaid,“ the son of Tailchan,

PAnn. Ulton. War. Mss. vol. 34. *Allemande. *War, Bishops, p. 71. ‘King,
2p. 309. “War. Mss. vol. xxxiv. “King, p. 309. *ld.

bably lies the secret of this preference. This MacDonnell was chief of O’Neill’s
gallowglasses, and the building of the house being his work, it is likely that his
choice, or the will of O’Neill, whose family was always attached to the Franciscans,
turned the scale in their favour.”

“ At 1266, the “ Annalists” record “ Maelpatrick O’Scannail, primate of Armagh,
brought the friars minor to Armagh, and afterwards cut a broad and deep trench
around the church.” In 1357, thé guardian of this house appealed to the Pope at
Avignon against the acts of the primate, Richard Fitz-Ralph. In 1442, Nimeas
O'Lochlen received from the primate permission to preach indulgences throughout
Ireland. In 1450, primate Mey sojourned in this house. In 1455, the diocese
was laid under an interdict, but a relaxation was granted by the primate, in
favour of McCrener, the guardian. In 1518, the convent was obtained for the
Franciscans of the strict observance. In 1565, the convent was destroyed, and the
friars retired to places of security. ‘They were discovered by one Donald, and the
consequence was that friars Roger M‘Congail, Conatius Macuarta, and Fergal
Bardeus, were stripped and flogged through the principal streets.

On the 3rd July, 1620, the pseudo-primate, Hampton, received a patent in which
the site and precinct of the Franciscan monastery was granted to the see. The
ruins of the building may yet be traced within the demesne.

The author makes no mention of the church dedicated to St. Columba, which
stood in Armagh. Dr. Reeves gives the following particulars connected with it.
The “ Annals of Ulster,” at 1010, state that ‘‘ Donadhach, of the church of Colum.
cille, in Armagh, fell asleep in Christ.” The “ Four Masters,” at 1152, record the
death of ‘‘Ferghall Ha Fercubhais, lecturer of Armagh for a time, and of the
regles (or abbey church) of Columkille, in Armagh, for a time. In 1614, temple
Columkilly is mentioned as in the street called Bore-netrian-Sassenach, and a
northern limit of the premises of St. Peter and St. Paul's abbey. In Bogue’s map
of 1760, the site of St. Columba’s church is laid down as due north of the meeting-
house, at the opposite side of A bbey-street.

“ The St. Lugaid referred to in the text is mentioned in “ Adamnan's Life of St.
Columba,” as residing, at the time of that saint's death, in the monastery of Cluain-
finchoil, “‘ meadow of the white-hazel.” Colgan identified this place with Cluain-
fiacul, Clonfeakle. But Clonfeakle is called in the “ A ” Cluain-fiachna.
meadow or plain of St. Fiachna. Jocelin calls this church C/uain-facail in his
“Life of St. Patrick;” but in the taxation of 1306, and in the registries of the
archbishops Sweteman, Swayne, Mey, Octavianan, and Dowdall it is called by
various forms of the name Cluain-Fiachna. The ‘‘ Annals of the Four Masters,

