--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-121.png ---
Ee

County of Cork. 97

Mary, XXXV. Henry VIIL, thé abbot was found seized of his
priory with a cemetery and certain buildings on the site, con-
taining one acre, annual value besides reprises, 6s. 8d. also
sixty acres of arable land, of the small measure, and forty of
pasture, being the demesne lands of the priory, annual value,
besides reprises, 40s.; one hundred and twenty acres in the
said townland, annual value, besides reprises, 60s.; and the
following rectories appropriated to the said prior :—Ballybeg,
annual value, besides reprises, £4; Kilkerran, Ardsoyll, and
Rathbarry, annual value, besides reprises, 100s. ; Ballycloghie
and Ballycastell, annual value, besides reprises, £7 ; Druse-
mallyny, in MacWilliam’s country, annual value, besides
reprises, £6; Carryketwohill, annual value, besides reprises,
46; Castlebeghan, annual value, besides reprises, £6 ;
Kylcarryhyn, annual value, besides reprises, 20s. ; Killnemal-
laghe, annual value, besides reprises, £8; and Rossaghe,
Downeraghill, and Cahirdowgan, annual value, £6; all sterling
money. The said lands and rectories lie in the county of Cork.

Inquisition, 5th February, III. James I, finds that, 28th
April, XVI. Elizabeth, a grant for a term of years was made
to George Bourcher, Esq., of this priory and the demesne
thereof, with certain lands in the town of Ballybeg; as also the
rectories of Ballybeg, Ballikeran, Ardhoile, and Rathbarry,
Ballyclogh and Ballycastell, Crustmalyny in MacWilliam’s
country, Carricktwohill, Castlebechin, Kill . . Kilnemal-
lagh, Rosseghe, Downeragill, and Chairdowgan, in the counties
of Cork and Mayo. To hold the same at the annual rent of
441 10s. Irish money.

David de Cardigan was prior in the reign of King Henry
III. and John de Barry in the following reign.°

The possessions belonging to this house were, in the 16th
year of Queen Elizabeth, granted for the term of 21 years to
George Bourchier, Esq., who forfeited the same by non-pay-
ment of the rent ;? those lands and tithes were granted in
trust to Sir Daniel Norton, for the wife of Sir Thomas Norris,
president of Munster, and were found, in the year 1622, to
be of the yearly value of £ 260.4

Of this abbey there yet remain theeast windowand the steeple,
which is a strong building, and by the holes in the vaulted roof
it appears that they had a chime of bells; the traces of the
foundation, with an high tower a considerable way to the south-
west, prove it to have been a truly magnificent structure."

Ballymacadane ;4 four miles from the city of Cork, on the

° King, p. 218. ? King, p. 218. Smith, vol. 1, pp. 323) 324. "1d.

4 Ballymacadane.—' Inquisition st June, XXX. Queen Elizabeth, finds that the

two carrucates of land called Ballimackedane and Bally Ildy, adjacent to this abbey
H

