--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-262.png ---
230 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

afterwards he was made bishop of Connor, and in the year
1134, archbishop of Armagh ;? he appointed

1124. Malachy, brother to Christian, the abbot of Mellifont,
to succeed him in the government of this abbey.*

1131. The abbot Maurice O’Hindrectaigh died in pilgrimage
at Armagh, on 3rd of October.”

1163. Died the abbot Moyle Issa O’Concran, denominated
the head of Ulster.*

* War. Bos. p. 54. * Allemande. Tr. Th., p. 303. ° Ann. annon.

the “ Reformation” an impropriation of Bangor, was Tealach-na-lurgan, “The Hill
of the Shin.” The origin of this name is thus accounted for in Duald MacFirbis’
GEnealogical work, which says, speaking of Aodh, son of Eochagan, King of

lidia, who was slain at Kilmashoge, near Rathfarnham, in the county of Dublin,
in the year 917, while fighting against the Danes under Niall Glundubh—* it was
that Aodh, son of Eochagan, that gave his dues and services to Comgall (the
patron saint and founder of Bangor) on breaking his shin at Tealach-na-lurgan
while committing sacrilegious violence on Comgall’s congregation.” There is none
of the religious establishments connected with Bangor, which approaches so near
in name to Tealach-na-lurgan as Ballyurgan, and the change from Ballylurgan to
Ballyurgan is very slight. The Protestant bishop reports, in 1622, “ Capella de.
Ballyverdgan ruin,” and says, “ The great tithes are thought to belong to the Abbey
of Bangor.” Mr. James Magee, in whose field the ruin stands, has had it neatly
enclosed to protect it from further injury. Portions of a large cross, and some
stones marked with crosses, still attest the ancient faith of that remote offshoot of
ancient Bangor. .

A.D. 822, “The plundering of Bangor by the foreigners ; the oratory was
broken, and the relics of Comgall were taken from the shrine in which they were,
as Comgall himself had foretold, when he said :—

“* It will be true, true, by the will of the Supreme King of kings ;
My bones shall be brought, without defect, from the beloved Bangor to Antrim.’”

A.D, 838. “ Maelgaimhridh, a select scribe, anchorite, and abbot of Bangor,
died.”

A.D. 847. “ Arannan, abbot of Bangor, died.”

A.D. 869. “ Maenghal, the pilgrim, abbot of Bangor, died.”

A.D. 878. “ Fearchair. abbot of Bangor, died.”

A.D. 881. “ Raghallach, abbot of Bangor, died.” This may be the St. Raighuil
whose festival was kept at Bangor on the 11th of June. MacFirbis, in his annals,
has s preserved a poem written by Riaghuil, of Bangor, on the death of Alfrid, King
of Northumbria.

A.D. 884. Maeltuile, son of Dunghal, abbot of Bangor, died.”

A.D. got. “Innreachtach, son of Dobhailen, abbot of Bangor, died on the 26th
day of April, of whom was said :—

“* One and three hundred fair revolving years from the death of Comhgall, of

Bangor,
To the period of the happy death of the great, illustrious Innreachtach.’”

A.D. 919. “‘ Maenach, son of Siadhal, abbot of Bangor, and the¥best scribe of
all the Irish race, died.” The annalists likewise record the deaths of Cairbre, and
of Fearghal, abbot of Saighir. Of them was said :—

“It was not a year without events; premature died the abbot of lasting Bangor,
And the successor of Diarmaid, Cairbre, the gifted-above-all-good pillar,
The abbot of Saighir with multitudes, Fearghal, man of gentle exactions
Domhnall, a scion of all good ; a plague among the Gaeidhill
I have not enumerated. I shall not enumerate, because I am sorrowlul
What misfortune came upon Ireland in this year.”

