--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-182.png ---
156 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

The Preceptory of Knights Templars, at Rhincrew—1183.—In this year the
Order of the Knights Templars was confirmed ; and soon after a Preceptory was
founded on the suaimit of the commanding hill of Rhincrew (Xeen-cruagh in Irish,
i.e. The Firm Promontory) which overlooks the Blackwater as it grandly de-
douches into the Broad of Youghal. ‘We have very scanty materials for the
history of the Knights Templars that settled in Ireland ; but there is reason to
believe that the Preceptory at Rhincrew was very richly endowed, for castles
belonging to its agents are found in many parts of the Counties of Cork and
Waterford, which were erected both to protect their vassals and to enforce due
paynent of rent and feudal service.” (O’Flanagan’s Guide to the Blackwater,
p- 31.

1186.—Raymond le Gros is believed to have died here, and the neighbouring
Abbey of Molana is reputed to have been his burial-place.

1304.—The houses of the Knights Templars in Ireland were suppressed by a
royal order, addressed to Sir John Wogan; and the Knights of Bt John, or
Hospitallers, were, in 1314, placed in possession of their estates. ‘‘ We have
not been able to discover whether any parts of the lands belonging to Rhincrew
were assigned to this, the rival Order of the original possessors, for we have no
traces of the Hospitallers in the south of Ireland ; the priory of St. John in
Waterford, which has indeed been sometimes described as a foundation of their
Order, was really a monastery of Benedictines, In the Maltese records, however,
we find Irish Knights holding high rank, and entries of money received from
estates belonging to the Order in Ireland ; and there is also evidence to shew
that the lands of Rhincrew were not seized by the Crown previous to the general
dissolution of monasteries.” [©’Flanagan, p. 32,]

1585-6.—3 Feb.—Rhincrew was granted to Sir Walter Raleigh. [Patent at
Lismore. ]

1602.—7 Dec.—Raleigh assigned his grant to Mr. Richard Boyle, afterwards
Earl of Cork.

The Nunnery, or Chapel, of Saint Anne’s—1190.—About this year the Nunnery
er Chapel of St. Anne’s, with which was connected a Light Tower, was founded
by the Anglo-Norman occupiers of Youghal, on the cliff at the West side of the
harbour’s mouth. The house was richly endowed by the Founders, under the
condition that the nuns should see that the light was regularly maintained.

1542.—St. Anne’s Chapel was dissolved, at the same time with the Franciscan
Friary.

1397-24 Jan. By letters patent of this date, St. Anne’s Chapel and one acre
near the same, with the town and village of Rathnolan, were granted in fee farm
to George Isham, gent., along with the Franciscan Friary, and its precincts, at
2s. 4d. [Patent at Lismore.]

1603.—13 Sept. James Fullerton, gent., obtained from the King a patent
for several concealed Church lands, which demised to him (along with others)
the Chapel of St. Anne and the Franciscan Friary, with one pa or close,
called John Mahowne's Park, containing 2 arable acres, rent 12¢. Irish, total
rent £6 13 4 Irish. [Calendar of Patent Rolls: Jac. I. p. 7.J

1605.—20 June. Grant from the King to Donatus, or Donogh, Earl of
Thomond, (among others) : ‘‘The Chapel of St. Anne near the town of Youghall,
with the small parcels of land thereto bel@hging, containing 1 acre, as granted in
fee-farm 24 Jan. 1597, to George Isham, gent.” [Calendar of Patent Rolls: Jac.
I. p. 80.
bearee —M. Boullaye le Gouz, the French traveller, who visited Youghal this
year, thus mentions St. Anne’s: “At musket-shot from the town there was
formerly a convent of nuns on the sea-shore, and there remains of it a Tower
called the Nunnery, upon which the nuns used to light torches to enable vessels
to come into the harbour during the night.” From this record it would appear
that the Nunnery had been at this time removed, excepting the Light Tower that
came down to our own day.

1665.—21 July. The Franciscan Friary and its appurtenances, ‘“‘together with
the dissolved Nunnery or Chappell called St. Anne's Chapell, with the applotments,
situate lying and being in and neere the site, circuit, ambite, and precincts of the
dissolved Monastery of St. Francis, allthe South Abbey of Youghall,” were leased

