--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-066.png ---
48 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

ACRES, In ARMAGH.

Lissaghkerrell. near Monaskellig 3 house in possession of Donald Savage.
Lackmullack oo +. 4 A messuage ,, Pat. Oge O’Heyre-.
Golworth, near Cavanakagh ... 60 es aD Elis Crawley.
Tawmaghiillen, lying in Mullagh- A shop adjacent ,,  Thady Crawley.

nocrovagh oe
In le Bend, in Ballyhurclain «. 20 A stable a Same.
Rectory of Mullaghbrack eo A messuage ,, Robert Moore.
Rectory and vicarage of 24 town-

lands of the church of Te oaghy, Messuage__,, B. M‘Rory.

alias Derenoose mo
Rectory of Tynan oo as a Manus M ‘Garrey.
Rectory af, Soumericany, alias » ” Cael O’Monaghan.
Vicarage of Leballyeglisse oD Acowhouse,&c. ,, | Thady Crawley.
ett a towne us thet A tenement, &c. ,, | H. Oge M‘Codden
Recor of Clonfeacle, in said A messuage ,, John Davis.
Rectory of Spoctane, i in county of A messuage with a D. M‘Crawle

Armagh ... curtilage y
All the tithes in the seven town-

lands of Kilnefegart, alias 6p ” John Rudworth.

Fieghth ... “ss ;
Rectory of Tomachbryn oD ” ” Percy Williams.

Three messuages near the Franciscan
friary.

Within the precincts of the priory, an hall, unum magnum,
atrium, Anglicé, a great backside, and a messuage built
therein, and another backside and messuage.®

By another inquisition, taken March 24th, 1625, it appears
that the prior, with his brethren, had totally forsaken the
priory, and were all dead about twenty-five years before the
holding of this inquisition; that Sir Toby Caulfield, Lord
Charlemount, had, about the year 1620 received, as seneschal
to Henry, then archbishop of Armagh, the rents of the said
Ballyboes, and that John Symons, clerk, had, from the feast
of All Saints, 1623, to the day of the taking of this inquisition,
received the profits of the said ballyboes, and of the tenements
in the town of Armagh ; that the rent of the seven townlands
was £46, and that Symons had expended part thereof in
erecting some stalls in the choir of the cathedral.'*

*King, p. 133. ‘King, p. 134-

37In 1619, August Ist, there was a royal letter to grant these lands for a choir
at Armagh. On 7th April, 1627, King Charles granted a charter founding the
college of King Charles in the cathedral church of Armagh; and this body of vicars
choral adopted the old name and called themselves Collideans. In 1634, a new
charter was granted to remedy some defccts in the former one; wand, in 1722,
George I. issued a supplemental charter in their favour. The vicar’s holdings in
the city of Armagh represent the original site of the old Culdee priory. They are
near the cathedral ground on the south-east.

