--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-207.png ---
County of Donegall. 179

Bothchonais > In Inis-eoguin ; this was formerly a great
and celebrated abbey’, of which St. Coemgal, brother to St.
Cele Christus, who died a.D. 721, and a different person from
the Saint of Bangor, was abbot.*

1 Act, SS., ~. 108. *1d., p. 454.

that came in his way, O’Neill having narrowly escaped by the back of his tent,
and fled with but two or three ‘ his attendants to his own territory. But
O'Donnell was not permitted long to enjoy the fruits of his victory. He soon
after coquetted with the English whom he treacherously introduced into Derry,
where they pillaged and profaned the Monastery. For this crime, as well as for
his unnatural conduct towards his father, God visited him with signal punishment.
In A.D. 1566, his life was cut short by a sharp and sudden death. It is thus
described by the Four Masters under that date :—‘‘O’Donnell (Calvagh, the son
of Manus, son of Hugh Dey, son of Hugh Roe, son of Niall Garv, son of Tur-
lough of the Wine) fell (dead) from his horse, in the beginning of winter, #.¢., on
the 26th October, on the public road, between Baile-aghadh-chaoin, and the church
of Rath (Ryemoghy), in the midst of his cavatry, without the slightest starting,
stumbling, shying, or prancing of his horse, after his return from England, where
he had been that same year.” Bellaghan is the contraction for Baile-aghadh-
chaoin, that is, the place of the pleasant or beautiful aspect. Every trace of the
monastery is now removed, for the present ruin is evidently of a spacious Gothic
church, about which the people have no tradition whatever. The well Cabhartach,
mentioned in the ‘‘ Annals” as being near to it, must be the curious old well,
called Tober Slaun (healing well), in the townland of Drimoghill. The church of
Rath, or Ryemoghy, not far from it, and where O'Donnell met his sad fate, is
noticed by Colgan at page 510 of his Acta Sanctorum. He tells us that St.
Cruthnecants, the tutor of St. Columba, was, “on a certain solemnity of our
Lord’s nativity, invited by a certain holy bishop, Brujacius, son of Degadius, to
go to him to the church of Rath-Enaigh (now Rye or Raymochy), in the territory
of Tir-enna, and brought with him the holy youth, Columba. After they arrived the
office was recited, but the holy Cruthnecanus, worn with old age and the fatigue
of his journey, was obliged to stop in the middle of the long psalm, ‘ Miseri-
cordias Domini in eternum contabo,’ when the boy Columba, immediately took up
the psalm, just where St. Cruthnecanus left off, and continued to recite his every
alternate verse till the office was concluded, though he had neverbeen taught even to
read this or any other psalm.” Ryemochy is now the name of one of the three parishes
which make up the Lagan—a territory of large extent and great fertility. Here
the plantation of Ulster fixed its most permanent abode, for to this day it is almost
entirely occupied by the planter’s descendants, about whom O’Donovan makes
a very singular remark in his manuscript notes, which are to be seen in the Royal
Irish Academy. He says, that probably the Scotch Murrays came from this
territory, because its chief, in A.D. 1267, was Hugh O’Murray. Moreover, that
from an early period a considerable number of the Tyrconnell families emigrated
to Scotland and returned with the plantation; they emigrated as McSweeny's,
McLaughlin’s, &c., and they returned as Maxwells, McCleans, &c.

_® Bothchonais. This is a very old foundation. It was endowed by Conas, for
it is called after him, and he was the husband of Darerca, St. Patrick's sister,
and mother of two holy bishops, Mael and Maelchu. In the beginning of the
eighth century St. Coemgellus, the brother of St. Christicola, governed this monas-
tery, and from this time down to the middle of the eleventh century it is mentioned
in the ‘‘ Annals” under three distinct dates, viz.: ‘A.D. 850, Ceaunfzladh, son of
Ultan, wise man of Both-chonais, died; A.D. 987, Dubhdabhoireann, archinneach
of Both-chonais, died; and A.D. 1049, Tuathal Ua h Uail, archinneach of Both-
chonais, died.” Colgan has a very interesting chapter on it in his Acta Sanctorum,
page 108, where he speaks of it in connection with St. Melisa, as once famous
and celebrated, and his testimony is the more valuable because of the fact, that
he was himself a native of Inishowen, where this monastery flourished. ‘ Both-
chonais,” he says, ‘‘ was formerly a great and celebrated monastery in the diocese

