--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-264.png ---
232 Ancient Monasterics of Ireland.

1217. Nicholas, bishop of the Isles, was interred in this
abbey.t

1273. ———— Molys, the prior of this abbey, was elected to
govern the abbey of Saul, but the royal license not having
been obtained, he was set aside! .

1380. In a parliament held this year it was enacted, that no
mere Irishman should be suffered to make his profession here.*

» Harris's Collect., vol. 1. } Willis's Cathedrals, vol, 1, p. 364. * King, p. 93-

of the black knee). It was he who urged that patriotic prince to free his country
from the Danish invaders, but, unfortunately, he perished in the attempt, at the
battle of Dublin, 916. Of Celedabhaill’s part in the transaction, the annals record
—‘Celedabhaill, son of Scannal, successor of Comgall, and confessor of Niall
Glundubh, was he who had requested Niall to come to this battle; and it was he
who gave the Viaticum to Niall, after having refused to give him a horse to carry
him from the battle. He never returned from that pilgrimage.”

A.D. 927. “Celedabhaill, son of Scannal, successor of Cor ll of Bangor,
throughout Ireland, bishop, scribe, preacher, and learned doctor, died on his pil-
grimage at Rome on the 14th of September, and in the fifty-ninth year of his age.”
Of the year of his death was said :—

“Three times nine, nine hundred years, are reckoned by plain rules,
From the birth of Christ, deed of purity, to the holy death of Cele, the cleric.”

A.D. 935- “ Muireadh. abbot of Bangor, died.”

A.D. 938. ‘ Muircheartach of Camus. abbot of Bangor, died.”*

A.D. 951. “ Dubhinnsi, a sage and bishop of the family of Bangor, died.”

A.D. 956. “ Tanaidhe Mac Uihdir (now Maguire) successor of Comgall, was
killed by the foreigners.”}

A.D. 980. *‘Sinach, son of Muirthuilen, abbot of Bangor, died.”

In the same year, “ Maelcothaig, son of Lahtnan, successor of Comgal and
Mocholmog. died.”

A.D. 1015. “ Diarmiad Ua Maeltelcha, successor of Comgall, died.”

Dr. Reeves, in his history of Down and Connor, gives, but from what source I
cannot say, a different reading of this entry :—“ Diarmiad Ua Maeltecha, successor
of Comgall, learned scholar, scribe, and bishop, died.”

The earliest record of the residence of a bishop at Bangor is in the Annals of
Inisfallen, at the year 810, which answers to 824 of the common era, but the
manner, as Dr. Reeves remarks, in which it is expressed implies that the presence
of a bishop in the monastery was not an unusual occurrence. The entry in the
Annals of Inisfallen is :—* Bangor, wasted by the Danes, and the shrine of Comgall
broken open by them, and its learned men and bishops were smitten by the sw orl.”
Diarmiad Na Maeltecha was one of those superiors of Bangor who combined the
office of abbot and bishop. M°Firbis, speaking of him in his genealogical work,
says :—“‘ Cathal, son of Aodh Roin (King of bilidia, or Eastern Ulster, who was
slain 732), from whom the Clan Cathal, of whom was Diarmaid O’Maoiltealcha,
successor of St. Comgall, and the head of the wisdom of the Gaels.” From this
date, indeed before it, owing to its exposed position, which subjected it to continual
incursions of the Danes, Bangor was on the decline, and we find that the annalists
cease to be so regular in chronicling the obits of its abbots.

A.D. 1058. “ Colman Ua-h-Aireachtaigh, successor of Comgall, of Bangor, died.”

A.D. 1064. “‘Donnchadh Ua Mathghamna, King of Ulidia, was slain by the
Ulidians themselves in the Daimhliag (stone church) of Bangor. Brodar, the
enemy of Comgall (it was by him the king was killed at Bangor), was slain by the
lord of Dalaraidhe.” This reference to a stone church at Bangor thirty years before

* Now Camus MacCosquin, county Derry. This was one of Comgall’s
monasteries.

fn is the earliest notice of the family of Maguire occurring in the Irish
Anna


