--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-125.png ---
County of Cork. 101

ancient corporation, governed by a mayor and aldermen, but
is now gone to decay. David Oge Barry, Lord Buttevant,
founded a monastery here in A.D. 1290, for conventual
Franciscans, and dedicated it to St. Thomas the martyr! But
this foundation must have been earlier than the time here
set down; for we find that William Barry, in the year 1273,
granted the whole church of Cathirdusgan to the prior of

1 King, p. 136. War. Mon., Lodge, vol. 1, p. 196.

Kilmore, in a beautiful and fertile country at the foot of the Ballyhowra mountains,
and on the banks of the Awbeg (i.c., little river), about 22 miles N.W. from Cork.
Here, too, are the remains of a sumptuous ruin of the ancient abbey of Buttevant,
picturesquely situated on the steep bank of the river Awbeg. See an interesting
sketch of this historic place in ‘‘ Smith's History of Cork,” p. 112, &c.

Buttevant derives its present name from the Norman war-cry of the Barrys—

‘* Boutes en avant :"—it was in olden times called Ki/nemullagh, as we learn from
the poet Spenser :

“*To Buttevant, where spreading forth at large,
It giveth name unto that auncient cittie,
Which Kilnemullah cleped is of old.”

In many ancient documents, however, it is also called Bothaun, and in Latin,
Bothonia. The ‘‘ Annals of the Four Masters” fix, with accuracy, the foundation
of the monastery for the Friars Minors here : “A.D, 1251. A monastery was erected
at Kilnamullagh, in the diocese of Cork, by the Barry; and it was afterwards
selected as the burying place of the Barrys.” Though Buttevant has now dwindled
to a village, it was formerly a walled and corporate town ; and to judge from its
ruins, must have been of considerable importance. The Barrys ruled here with
regal splendour, and almost with royal power. Such a centre was it become of

iety, that Smith writes: ‘‘This whole town formerly seems to have

en an assemblage of churches and religious houses” (History of Cork, i., 315),
and it merited from Borlase the eulogy, that it was ‘‘an old nest of abbots
and friars.” Ward, in his “MS. History,” gives the following account of the
Franciscan Convent of Buttevant : ‘It was built in 1251, and was placed under
the care of the Superior of Cork in 1260. In the reign of Queen Elizabeth the
friars were several times driven away from it, and some of them were arrested and
thrown into prison. All the buildings, with the exception of the church, were
ruined, and that was preserved on account of the tombs of the nobility there
buried, but all the images were broken. Still some of the friars continued to
reside there, partly in the conventual buildings or their ruins, and partly in the
neighbourhood.”

Wadding also writes regarding this place :—‘‘ Buttefania, or Buttevania: by
Pisanus it is corruptly called Bachonia, and by Rodulphus, Bathonia. The town
was formerly large and frequented, now it is reduced and poor. Two illustrious
families, the Barrys and Lombards, had their residence there. Some say that the
convent was erected by the Barrys, others by the Prendergasts : but I think it was
by the Barrys, whose magnificent tomb was erected in the middle of the choir,
and whose whole family always evinced their piety towards our Order. In the
church are many sepulchres of nobles. It is wonderful with what care the friars
have repaired some of the ruins of this convent.” In the crypt is an immense
collection of bones and skulls, which are popularly supposed to be the remains of
those who fell in the sanguinary battle of Knockninoss on the 13th of November,
1647. Among those who were slain on this occasion was the famous MacAlistair
MacDonnell, surnamed Colkitto. It is said, however, that a great portion of
these human bones were brought to this church from the ancient abbey of Ballybeg,
about half a mile distant, by a farmer who got possession of the abbey-land and
graveyard, and who was justly solicitous to deposit such remains in consecrated

