--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-273.png ---
County of Down. 241

sterling, and half a mark yearly for shoes, and also entertain-
ment for his horse and servant, in the same manner as the pre-
ceptor’s horses and servants were treated."

1333- The same prior granted to Robert, the son of Thomas,
the reve or bailiff, his entertainment in this house, and clothes
yearly, with the other free servants, or ten shillings in lieu
thereof, he to undertake the office of farmer to the commandery.”

1335. The same prior granted to friar William, the son of
Thomas, the like grant that he made to friar Thomas de
Vallet ; and that, if he should happen to be confined to his
chamber, his allowance should be daily two white loaves, and
two of the coarser kind, two flagons of ale, and two dishes of
meat from the kitchen ; that he should have free liberty to
bring into the house, or to remove from it, all his goods and
chattels, and at his death to dispose of them at his pleasure,
reserving the sum of thirteen shillings and four-pence to the
prior of Kilmainham as his mortuary ; and, moreover, that he
should have a proper place within the house whereon to build
a chamber for himself, but at his own cost and charges.*

1337. Friar Nicholas de Compton was preceptor.’

1339. He was preceptor this year also.”

1349. The prior of Kilmainham granted to Henry, the son
of R——,, during life, the employment of butler in this house,
with a mark sterling annually for clothes and other neces-
saries, to be paid by the preceptor; to have his diet at the
esquires’ table, but to have the same in his chamber if confined
thereto, and to have the power of disposing of his goods and
chattels at his death, excepting to the prior a marc for his
mortuary. The same year he granted to Robert de Hagard
the employment of farmer, with his diet, &c., with ten shillings
annually for his salary, and to have his diet in his chamber if
confined thereto, and a power to dispose of his goods and
chattels at his death, reserving to the prior a marc as his
mortuary. The same year he granted to brother friar Ste-
phen Kermardyn, chaplain, his corrody in this house, and that
at his death he might dispose of his goods, &c., reserving to
the prior forty shillings sterling as his mortuary; he
granted to him also a piece of ground, within the commandery,
whereon to erect a chamber for himself, but at his own cost
and charges.¢

1397. Thomas Mercameston was preceptor.*

This building is now a great heap of ruins, and the family
of Echlin possess several townlands in freehold, and also a
manor court which did belong to this commandery.®

" King, p. 61. “id. *Jd. p.62. %1d,~.7. */d., p. 83. *Id., p. 62.
Td. *Id. dd. ~.6t. * Hist., County Down, pp. 67 and 269.
R

