--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-134.png ---
108 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

‘Charles Smith, in his history of the county of Cork, says
that St. Ite founded a nunnery here, a little west of the

Ratto, in Kerry, when I stood on the ancient causeway opposite the tower, and
heard the same name applied to the tall, slender, symmetrical pillar, with its
perfect conical spire, as to the tall, graceful reeds, with their spiral feathered caps,
which lined the banks of the Brick, and of the canal which runs up nearly to
base of the tower” (p. 265).

In the ‘‘Book of Rights,” page 87, Cluain-uamha is mentioned as one of the royal
residences of the Kings of Cashel, and subsequently is added :—

‘*Of the right of Cashel in its power
Are Bruree and the great Muilchead ;
Seanchua the beautiful, Ros-raeda the bright :
And to it belongs the noble fort of Cluain-uamha.”

The following facts, omitted by Archdall, have been gleaned from our Ancient
Annals and the “ Wars of the Danes” :—

A.D. 821. Cucaech, abbot of Cluain-uamha, died.

A.D. 822. A party of marauders plundered Cork, Inis-Temhni, Begery Island
in Wexford harbour, Cloyne, and Rosmaelain. The barren rock, called Scelig
Michil, i.e, St. Michael’s Rock, the abode of a solitary named Edgall, was also
invaded by them, and, as they found nothing else to take, they carried him off into
captivity, in which he died in the following year. Keating says the invaders, on
this occasion, were White Lochlann, that is, Norwegians.

A.D. 835. Between the years 824 and 835 the greater part of the churches of
Erin were plundered by the Danes. The monasteries and churches were the
reputed repositories of wealth, as they were the centres of civilization throughout
our island. They thus became the chief aim of the plunderers, and even at this
early date the marauders made their way to the ecclesiastical establishments in
some of the most remote parts of the country. The long list of the places plun-
dered by them on this occasion ends with the names ‘‘ Cell-Uasaille, now Killossy,
or Killashee, near Naas, county Kildare ; Glendalough, county Wicklow ; Cluain-
Uamha, county Cork ; and Mungairet, now Mungret, county Limerick.”

A.D. 857. Maelcobha Ua Faelain, abbot of Cluain-Uamha, died. Lynch’s MS.
gives us in this year the additional entry :—‘ Robertachus bonus episcopus de
Cluain-Uamha obiit.”

A.D. 884. Reachtaidh, learned Bishop of Cluain-Uamha, died.

A.D, 888. Cluain-Uamha was again plundered by the Danes, and Fergal, son
Rite its bishop and abbot, and Danan, son of Cerin, its sub-abbot, were
killed,

A.D. 1056. Daighre O’Dubatan, anchorite of Cloyne, died at Glendaloch.

A.D. 1071. A fleet with Dermot O’Brien sailed round Ireland: he devastated
Cluain-Uamha, and took away the relics of St. Finbarr from Cill-na-clerich.

A.D. 1075. O’Carrain, archinnech of Cluain- Uamha quievit in Christo.

A.D. 1094. O’Molvain, Bishop of Cluain-Uamha, died.

A.D. 1099. Uamnachan Ua-Mictire, comharb of Colman, son of Lenin, died.

A.D. 1137. Cluain-Uamha and Ardagh of Bishop Mel were burned, both
houses and churches.

A.D. 1149. Nehemiah O’Moriertach, bishop, died. He flourished in 1140, as
we learn from St. Bernard in Vita S. Malachiae, who gives him the title ‘* Epis-
copus Cluan-vaniae,” which, in some of the printed texts, is corrupted into ‘* Duen-
vaniae.” Bishop Nehemiah is described by an old writer in ‘* Tyndal’s Vision”
as ‘‘a plain and modest man, excelling in wisdom and chastity.”

A.D. 1159. O’Duberg, also called O’Dubrein, abbot of Cluain-Uamha, died.

A.D. 1162. Diarmid Ua-Laighnen, lector of Cluain-Uamha, was killed. He
is called by Lynch ‘‘ Dermicius O’ Leighnin, archidiaconus Cluanensis et Momoniae,
Doctor.

A.D. 1167. Ua-Flannain, bishop of Cluain-Uamha, died.

A.D, 1192. Matthew O’Mongach, bishop of Cloyne, died. He was Legate of

