--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-293.png ---
County of Down. 257

1538. The Lord Deputy Gray burnt the church about this
time, defaced the monuments of the Saints Patrick, Columb,
and Brigid, and was guilty of many other sacrilegious acts.”

The prior of this house sat as a baron in Parliament.

This monastery, with the appurtenances, a garden within
the site, together with a carucate of land in Down, and the
water called Loughdowne ; divers lands in Narenagh, Carrick-
enebregie, Ballindonetie, Dromquillan, Reanyston alias Bally-
vean, Ballymariscall alias Marshallston, Kiltaghlins, Bally-
galgalme, Tobbertyne, Dellyen, Ballusrogh, Ardmyn, Bally-
froill, Ballynecrosse, Ballingreley alias Slivengreley, Logh-
money, Ballyalton, Balderenolde, Ballycroston, Ballycrotill,

> War. Annals.

At the dissolution the lands of this abbey were valued at £60 Ios. od., and its
appropriations at £65 13s. 4d. (Inquis. 3 Edward VI.) By an inquisition held in
Downpatrick, April 9th, 1662, to inquire into the property held by Thomas
Cromwell, Earl of Ardglass, it was found that that nobleman was possessed of the
following properties formerly belonging to that abbey :—The site and a garden
within the precincts of the abbey, ‘‘ Hay-Island, otherwise Inishane ;” “ Cony-
island, otherwise Hoggisland ;% the ‘ Roundmount, otherwise Donecoscue ;”
«*Court-ground ;” “half of the town of Crombane, half the town of Cromreagh, half
the town of Sleevemoyle,” “ Parkenearle,” one quarter of “Tolleshane,” ‘‘Collis,”
“<*Farrinfad,” “Crottmore,” Prior's Island, ‘‘Tacrecam, otherwise Acrecam ;”
“ Crannaghmore and Crannaghbeg ;” “ Knockrennan, otherwise Knocknegrenan ;”
Friersbogg, ‘‘ Tollynecroy ;’ a head-rent of 405. per annum from Walshestown,
and a head-rent of §s. per annum out of the two townlands of Ballydugan, Ring-
ban, “ Tollwoollenamore, Tollwoollenbeg, and Castledorras ;” “the water called
Loughdowne or Loughcoyne (Strangford Lough). in which ships or boats can sail
to the port of Strangford, where salmon and other fish are taken ;” *‘ Carrickne-
bregie, otherwise Carricknecregie ; Ballydonety, Drumquillians (Hollymount) ;
Veanstown, otherwise Ballyvenees ;” Marshallstown, ‘‘the two towns of Kintagh-
lins” (supposed to be Ballynoe), Ballygallam Tobermoney, Dillin, Ardmeen,
Struell, Ballynagross, Slievenagriddle, Loughmoney, Ballytrusten, Ballymurry, two
townlands of Ballybrarnagh, Ballysallagh, Ballee, Ballyhossett, Ballyclander,
«‘Ballymorett, otherwise Ballywannett ;” Annacloy, ‘‘ Ballydomanelly, otherwise
Ballydonelly ;” “ Carricknehawly,” “ Carrowcoolemuck, otherwise Quarter Col-
muck,” Crevis, Spittle Quarter, Bishop's Island ; ‘‘ Ballymoghtrimony, otherwise
Ballynecremony;” Coyle Castle, ‘‘ Rathcavan,” “‘Carrigmavanagh, otherwise Coyle-
town ;” Ballynacreg, ‘Carrowvanny, Ullequarter (Saulquarter), Ballybeg, Sheep-
landbeg, Grangewalls, Grangebane, together with two ferries.

The site and extensive landed possessions of this abbey and of the other religious
houses in Downpatrick were granted by the Crown to Gerald, Earl of Kildare, but
they, by his death without male issue, and upon the decease of his widow, Mabella,
were again escheated to the Crown, and in 1603 they were re-granted by James I,
to Charles Blount, Lord Mountjoy, in consideration for his service against Hugh
O'Neill, Earl of Tyrone. Mountjoy transferred his rights to Edward Cromwell,
Baron Okeham, a nobleman of Devonshire. These estates, with the exception of
some portions, remained in the Cromwell family up to 1704, when the male line
having become extinct, the only surviving heiress, Lady Elizabeth Cromwell, mar-
ried the Right Honourable Edward Southwell, Principal Secretary of State for
Ireland, who obtained an Act of Parliament vesting these estates in the hands of
trustees for the purpose of selling a portion to pay off certain incumbrances, The
remainder descended to his grandson, Edward Southwell, who, in 1776, was created.
Baron de Clifford. He was succeeded by his son Edward, who died in September,
4832, without issue, when the property gavelled between his three sisters, and is at

s


