--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-168.png ---
142 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

ney, Inchegenilagh alias Inchegeilagh, Agheris, Clonedrohide,
Movidde, Carrigrowghanbeg, Whitechurch alias Templegeoll,
Kytanury, Moullie, with sundry other tithes; at the annual
rent of £40 Irish money.—Axd. Gen.

* Inquisition 17th April, 15th King James, finds, that the
rectories of Kilmaghen and Rostelaine were appropriated to,
this commandery, and that all the possessions belonging
thereto, these two rectories excepted, had been in the posses-
sion of John Barry from the 3rd day of February, 1614.—
Chief Rem.

Obalvene ; in a plea roll of the 44th of King Henry III.
we find an abbey of this name, said in the record to be in this
county.™

Omolaggie ; 28th June, 20th Queen Elizabeth, a grant was
made to the provost and fellows of the Holy Trinity near
Dublin, of twenty acres of land contiguous to a cross, and
parcel of the possessions of the abbey of the Corbe of
Omolaggie in this county. See the abbey of Cong, in county
of Mayo.™™ We can find no other vestige of this house.

Quchwill ; This abbey is mentioned to have existed in this
county, A.D. 1355,2 but we know no more of it.

Ross ;°* a small market-town and an episcopal see, now

™ King, p.133- ™@Aud. Gen. "Id., p.142. °Was anciently called Ross alithri,
Ross elihir, and Ross ylider.

33 Ross, formerly knownas Ross-ailithir(i.e., Rossof the pilgrims), and nowgenerally
called Ross-carberry, from the townland in which it is situated, is an Episcopal
See, and lies at the head of a creek about seven miles from Clonakilty. Camden
says the harbour was formerly navigable for ships. Lynch, Archdeacon of Killalla
repeats this statement in his MS. History of the Irish Sees, but adds, that
already, in his time, the harbour was blocked up with shifting sands. He further
tells us that the name oss in Irish has three distinct meanings, being used to
designate a meadowy plain, a grove, and, more frequently, a promontory. This
last meaning would well correspond with the territory of which we speak, which,
jutting out into the sea, presents quite the appearance of a promontory ; whilst
the smiling fields which adorn the surrounding country, would justify the application
of the name in its first meaning. The diocese was, from the earliest times, co-exten-
sive with the territory of the Corca-/aidhe: at Lynch’s time it was eighteen miles in
length, and four or five in width, and consisted of twenty-four parishes, besides three
detached parishes, situated around Berehaven. St. Fachnan, in Irish Fachtna,
who is also called Lachtna, is patron of the See, being founder of the monastery,
and Bishop of Ross in the sixth century. He was disciple of St. Finbarr in the
famous school of Loch-Eirche, and before proceeding to Ross, was abbot of the
Molana monastery, near Youghal. He also, like most of the contemporary saints
of Ireland, received lessons of heavenly wisdom from St. Ita, the Brigid of Munster.
Ross soon became so famous that crowds of students and religious flocked to it
from all parts, so that it was distinguished by the name of Xoss-ailithir, that is,
Ross of the pilgrims. The birth of St. Fachnan, and the future greatness of his
school, were foretold by St. Kiaran of Ossory, whoes mother was of his family, and
who himself was born in the territory of Ross, at a place still called 7raigh-Ciaran
(i.e, St. Kiaran’s strand), in Cape Clear Island. St. Fachnan, having lost his sight
by some accident when he was somewhat advanced in years, it was restored to him
through the merits of St. Mochoemog, also called Pulcherius, who was then in his
mother’s womb, and whose future sanctity was foretold by St. Fachnan, It is also

