--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-316.png ---
280 Ancient Monasteries of Iveland.

Maghera ;* alias Rathmurbuilg.

%! The parish of Maghera. The name of this parish was originally Rath-murb-
huilg (pronounced nearly Ra-murlough), which signifies ‘the rath at the sea
inlet,” There are two townlands named Murlough—one of which is in this parish
and the other in the parish of Kilmegan. The * Calendar of the Four Masters”
places the death of St. Donard at the year 506, but it considerably antedates the
event. Domangort (pronounced Donard), son of Eachach, Bishop of Rathmurbulg,
in Dalriada and Dalaradia, A.V. 506.” The church of St. Donard was in
Dalaradia, not in Dalriada, which is the north of the county of Antrim. The
error which occurs in nearly all the Irish martyrologies seems to have crept into
them from an early transcriber having confounded Murlough on the coast of
county Antrim with Murlough on Dundrum Bay. That it is the Murlough in the
county of Down that is intended, Dr. Reeves shows by the following quotation
from an ancient MS. :—‘‘Donard, from Kath-Murbulg, in Dalriada (recte Dala-
radia), from Sliabh-Slanga.” Sliabh-Slanga (mountain of Slange) was the
ancient name of Slieve Donard (mountain of Donard), which received that name
from one of the earliest colonists of Ireland, whose death is recorded by the Four
Masters under the year of the world 2533. ‘‘Slainge, son of Partholan, died in
this year, and was interred in the carn of Sliabh-Slanga.” The cairn of Slainge
still forms a very conspicuous object on the summit of Slieve Donard, but the
hero Slainge is forgotten in the traditions of the neigtbovrhood, while the memory
of St. Donard is enshrined in the veneration of the people. Giraldus Cambrensis
names Slainge ‘‘ Sa/anus,” and Donard “ Dominicus.” He says—‘‘ That exceed-
ing high mountain which overhangs the sea that flows between Ireland and
Britain is called Salanga. And because at the foot of it. after the lapse of many
ages, St. Dominicus had erected a distinguished monastery, it more commonly
bears the name of Dominicus’ mountain.” The monastery to which Giraldus
alludes is that of Maghera. Colgan, speaking of St. Donard, says—‘‘ Two
churches were consecrated to him—one at the base of a very high monntain
overhanging the sea in the eastern parts, which was called Rath-murlbulg (Rath-
murlow), now Machaire-Ratha (Maghera) ; the other is situated on the top of
the same very high mountain, far away from every human dwelling ; which,
nevertheless, even during the severe and terrible persecution of the heretics. used
to be frequented with a great concourse of people, and frequent pilgrimages in
honour of that miracle-working servant of God, who shone there in many
miracles.” Harris, writing in 1744, thus describes the scene of this pilgrimage :—
“ On the summit of this mountain are two rude edifices (if they mays so termed),
one being a heap of stones piled up in a pyramidical figure, m which are several
cavities, wherein the devotees shelter themselves in bad weather while they hear
Mass ; and in the centre of this heap there is a cave formed by broad, flat stones,
so disposed as to support each other without the help of cement. The other
edifice is composed of rude walls, and partitions called chappels, and perhaps
was the oratory and cell erected by St. Domangard, before hinted. Sir William
Petty mentions in his maps a chappel on the N.E. side of Slieve Donard, which
he calls Leniord’s Chappel ; but probably for want of due information he has
corrupted the name, and the true name of it is Donard's Chappel.” Dr. O’Doran,
writing on the 23rd of September, in the year (probably) 1752, to his agent in
Rome, says :—‘‘ I have it to add that I would be glad if I could get those indul-
gences of Crumdugh extended to Struel, for on that Fryday the Christians visited
Struel as well as Mount Donert, which is ten miles distant from sd. Struel.” This
holy retreat of St. Donard, perched on the high mountain which still perpetuates
his name, and towers over the range of lofty mountains which stretch away from
its sides, involuntarily forces on the imagination a feeling of total severance from
mankind, and recals to our minds how the saints valued heaven. and what price
they were prepared to pay for it. Father MacCana. in his * Irish Itinerary, *says :-—
“ But I cannot forbear to observe how our sa‘nts, scoring the earth about which
the miserable race of man so vehemently contends, sought a loftier range ; for itis a
fact for which I can vouch, that on the summit of that lofty pile, and in a different
region of the world, as it were, they sought an abode of holy retirement, of
which heavenly seclusion the traces still remain ; for in that, elevated region of

