--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-154.png ---
128 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

barony of Clangibbon. An Abbey was founded here under
the invocation of the Virgin Mary, for Cistertian Monks, who
were brought hither from an abbey on the Suire, in the
county of Tipperary ; and a new colony was afterwards intro-
duced from the abbey of Furnes, in Lancashire.°

° War. mon. Pembridges Ann. and Ann. B.V.M, Dubl. &c.

and it is there Mac Con was till the time of the battle of Ceann Abrath.” (See
Forbas Drom Damhghaire. Book of Lismore, and O’Curry’s copy, C.U.D., p. 42,
and O’Curry's Lectures on Manuscript Materials of Irish History, pp. 171-2, and
Second Series, vol. i., pp. 212, 278, &c., &c.)

The hitherto unpublished tract on the Topography of Fermoy, in the same old
MS., is interesting, as preserving the names and boundaries of the political and
ecclesiastical sub-denominations of this district, and the names of many of the old
ecclesiastical foundations of the place, with special references to the most remark-
able families, civil and ecclesiastical, of ancient Fermoy. It runs thus :—

“¢Crichadh-an-Chaille! of valour,
Is there one of you to tell [its history]
It was given to the son of Sonax [#.e., Mogh Ruth]
For his having relieved the Forbas, &c., &c.”

“This country was in two Triuchs® before it was given to Mogh Ruth, and

e there were eight Tuaths in each Triuch. and the line of demarcation between
those two Triuchs was, namely, the course of Glaisse Muilinn Mairteil® in Sliabh
Cain,* and Loch Luinge® on the Machaire, and Gleann na n-Dibergachael on Moin
Mor,6 and when being given to Mogh Ruth they were made into one Triuch, in
order to lessen the [political] influence of the race of Mogh Ruth after him, and
securities for preserving that freedom to him. Mogh Corb,’ son of Cormac Cas. and
his descendants after him ; and after that it was arranged into ten Tuaths, eight
ee to constitute the [political extent of the] country, and two Tuaths as border

lands.

‘*The first Tuath of these that is mentioned is the Eoganacht of Gleann

1 Crichadh an Chaille, one of the ancient names of the place now called Fermoy.
* Triuch—an ancient sub-denomination of land, supposed by some to be repre-
sented by the modern barony ; but the two Triuchs mentioned here comprised the
baronies of Fermoy, Condon. and Clongibbon. Tuath, an ancient political sub-
denomination of land. See W. K. Sullivan’s Introduction to O’Curry’s Lect.,
Vol. i. 3Glaisse Muillinn Mairtel, i.c., the stream of Martel’s [or Mortar] mill,
which flows southwar through the glen called Leaba Molaga [or St. Molaga’s
bed] into the river Fuinshion, north-west of Marshalstown, now called Abham
Carraig na m-Brointe (or the river of the rock of the Querns] ; others suppose this
to be the Sheep River to the west of the above mentioned stream. ‘4Sliabh Cain,
i.e, the range of mountaiys extending from the Galtees westward to Buttevant.
5 Loch Luinge—Probably the lake from which Baile an Locha, south of
Mitchelstown, has its name. The boundary line between the baronies of Fermoy
and Clangibbon passes through this townland. which is marked on Petty’s Map of
the County of Cork as Baile de Locha. ® Moin Mor—This place probably com-
prised the greater part (if not the whole) of the present Nagle Mountains, and the
coarse land on the northern and southern slopes of this range. This appears from
the fact that the monastery of Baile na Mona. situate four miles south of Mallow,
on the road to Cork. was in Moin Mor, and the glen called Gleann-na n-Diberga-
chaile was, in all probability, to the east of, or somewhere about, Ballyhooley,
7 Mogh Corb, son of Cormac Cas—There is evidently a mistake in our text here ;
Mogh Corb was son of Oiliall Olum, not of Cormac Cas _ He is mentioned in the
Annals of the Four Masters, at the year A.D. 195, as one of the seven sons of Oilioll
Olum, who were slain in the battle of Magh-Muchruimhe by Mac Con and his
forces. Cormac Cas was second son of Oilioll Olum, and ancestor of the Dal-g-
Cas tribes of Munster. ® Two Tuaths of border land—These were the two Tuaths

