--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-190.png ---
164 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

and-the Galls of Ulster built a castle here in 1213, for which
purpose they raised all the pavements and destroyed every
part of the abbey, the church alone excepted.*

Dominican Friary ,® which was also called the monastery
of the Bann,” was founded A.D. 1244° by the O’Cahanes, or
rather, as a good authority asserts, by the M‘Evelins,’ and was
dedicated to the Virgin Mary. Sir Robert Savage of
Ulster, Knt., an excellent soldier, died in 1360, and was buried
here.

A general chapter of the order was held at Rome in 1484,
when a licence was granted on November roth to Maurice
Moral, prior provincial, to reform this friary.®

Shane O’Boyle was the last prior; on the Ist of January,
1542, he voluntarily surrendered into the hands of the King’s
commissioners.»

Francis Porter, in his annals, tells a story of Bishop Bab-
bington having attempted in vain to burn an image of the
Virgin Mary, which belonged to this monastery, and the
bishop, being instantly seized with a violent illness, died in
the month of September, 1611!

A few of the ruins of the building remain near the town,
on the west side of the river.

Derry;" The metropolis of the county, and a corporation
town, sending two burgesses to parliament ; it is a good sea-
port, and will be ever famous for the noble defence it made
against King James II. in the year 1689.

*“Annal, Munst. » King, p.97. °ld. p. 87. War. Writers, p.77. “Burke, p.245-
*War. Mon. ‘Pembridge. & Burke. p.73. © King, p. 97. | Burke, p. 245.
& Burke, p. 244 and 245.

6 The Dominican Friary was situated on the left bank of the river, in the old
town, which was called Killowen. The old parish church is supposed to stand on
the site of the ancient church dedicated to St. John, from which the town derived
its name. One mile south of Coleraine is Afount Sandel, which originally bore
the name of Xil/santain, and probably had St. Sanctain for its patron. In the
year 1215, King John made a grant to Thomas Mac Uchtry, Earl of Athol (of
‘whom mention has been already made), of “ Killesantan and the castle of Culrath,”
&c.—(Hardy’s Rot. Chart., pag. 210; Rymer’s Foedera, pag. i., 140). An inquisi-
tion of 1605 describes this place as ‘Kil/santill, alias Mount Sandail,’ forming part
of the lands of the priory of Coleraine. Mount Sandel is at present ‘‘ one of the
largest and most perfect raths in the kingdom; it is 200 feet high, surrounded by a
deep dry fosse, and encircled near its summit by a magnificent terrace; in the centre
is a deep oblong cavity called the Giant’s Grave. There is also a very high and
perfect rath a little west of the Cranagh; another close to the church of Killowen ;
and a very curious fort near Ballysally.”—Lewis, Zo. Dict.

7 Derry, called in Irish Daire Calgaich, é.e., ‘‘the oak grove of Calgach,” dates
back to a very early period of our history. Calgach, which means a “ fierce war-
rior,” is supposed to be a form of the Latin name Ga/gacus, which occurs in Tacitus
(Agricola, cap. 29). In the Annals of Ulster, the foundation of St. Columba’s
monastery is placed in the year 545; ‘‘A.D. 545, Daire Coluim-cill fundata est.”
The old Irish life of the Saint presents the following narrative :—‘ Columcille went
then to Daire, that is, to the royal fort of Aedh, son of Ainmire, who was king of

