--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-171.png ---
)

County of Cork. 145

a large seminary of scholars. St. Fachnan mongach was
succeeded by St. Conall," and we are told, that St. Brendan
taught the liberal arts tn this school,’ in which St. Finchad,

9 Act. SS. p. 196. Tr. Th. Index, Usher. War. Mon.and Bps., p. 583. *Act.
SS. p.471. *War., vol. 2, p. 242.

and at the head of the choir was placed the high altar. To the left of the altar was
the sacristy, well supplied with vestments, crucifixes, silver-gilt chalices, and mitre
and crozier of silver. In the cemetery, outside the church, there was a belfry built in
the form of a tower, in which there was one large bell. As for the dignitaries of
the church, after the bishop there was a dean, with a yearly income of twelve marks,
an archdeacon with twenty marks, and a chancellor with eight marks. There were
also twelve canons, each having a revenue of about four marks, and four vicars
with asimilar income. All these assist daily in the choir, and celebrate low Mass,
On the festival days a solemn Mass is sung. The canons reside in different parts
of the diocese, which is only twenty miles in extent. The bishop’s residence is
about half a mile from the city, and is pleasantly situated on the sea-shore. The
episcopal revenue consists of corn, tithes, and pasturage, and amounts annually to
sixty marks, There are also twenty-four benefices in the bishop’s collation.”—
(Theiner Monumenta, &c., p. §28-9).

During the Confederate war in 1641, as we learn from Lynch’s MS. History of
the Irish Sees, ‘‘ the nave and tower of the cathedral were levelled to the ground,
the choir and two chapelstemaining intact. One of these chapels was dedicated
to the Blessed Virgin, the other to St. Fachnan ; and, in former times, so great
was the concourse of pilgrims to this church on the feast of the Assumption and
Nativity of the Blessed Virgin, that traders used to come thither with their mer-
chandize from all parts of the island, and in the fairs, which had their origin in
this custom, no tax was for a long time imposed on any articles of merchandize.”
Ware, whose authority is followed by many more recent writers, gives the name of
St. Finchad as one of St. Fachnan’s immediate successors. For this he rests on a
passage in Colgan’s Acta, page 607. Colgan, in his Acta, speaking of the disciples
of St. Finbarr, gives, from an old life of that saint, the following names at page
750 :—‘‘S. Finchadius de Domnachmor ; S. Fachna seu Facundus de Ria; S.
Facundus (i.¢., Fachna) de Ros-ailither.” Quoting the same passage at page 607,
by error of the printer, the words which I have italicised were omitted, and thus
the name “‘S. Finchadius de Ros-ailither” appears there in Colgan’s text. This
printer’s error is Ware’s only authority for assigning to St. Finchad the episcopate
of Ros-ailither. Others have inserted the name of Conall among the successors of
St. Fachnan, relying on the prophetic words recorded by Cathald Maguire, as pro-
nounced by St. Kieran of Saigher, when foretelling the future greatness of both St.
Conall and St. Fachtna. This passage of Cathald Maguire, however, makes no
mention of the episcopate of Conall, much less of his being successor of St. Fachnan
in the See of Ross. I insert, nevertheless, this passage of Maguire, as it makes known
to us the birth-place of St. Fachtna, not mentioned by the other authorities : —“ Pro-

hetavit Kieranus de S. Conallo et de S. Fachtnano de Ros-alithir dicens : nascetur
lius in Tulachteann, qui nobis fido amicitiae foedere junctus erit: et post eum
multos monachos et monasteria reget Conallus.”—(Acta SS., page 471.) Thus, as
regards the early successors of St. Fachnan, we must rest satisfied with the
scanty information given in the short record of the Book of Lecan cited above,
viz. : that twenty-seven bishops in uninterrupted succession ruled the See from its
holy patron to Bishop Dungalach. The quatrain, of which we gave a literal
version, was thus translated by O’Flaherty in his Ogygia :—‘‘ Dongalus a Fachtna,
ter nonus Episcopus extat, Lugadia de gente dedit cui Rossia mitram ;” and Ware
gives the following paraphrase made by Mr. Dunkin :—
“Hail, happy Ross! who could produce thrice nine,
All ritred sages of Lugadia’s line,
From Fachnan, crowned with everlasting praise,
Down to the date of Dongal’s pious days.’
The following passages, extracted for the most part from the Annals of the Four
: L

