--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-116.png ---
96

COUNTY OF CORK.

Abbey Mahon, near Timoleague, in the barony of Barryroe,
and close to the shore of the bay of Court M‘Sherrie ; the
monks of the Cistertian order founded an abbey here at their
own expense; the Lord Barry endowed it with eighteen
plowlands, which constitute the parish of Abbey Mahon ; but
the building was never finished, for the suppression of monas-
teries taking place, those lands were seized by the crown.
The walls of the church are yet standing. This house has been
mistaken for that of de Sancto Mauro, alias de Fonte vivo.!

Abbey Shrowry ;* To the west of Skibbereen, in the barony
of Carbury. Here are the ruins of a parish church, which is
said to have been a religious house, but nothing appears of
it in our authors.™

Ballybeg ,? a small walk from Buttevant, in the barony of
Orrery and Kilmore. Philip de Barry founded a priory here
for regular canons following the rule of St. Augustin, and
dedicated it to St. Thomas, the favourite saint of that age ;
he endowed it in the year 1229, in remembrance of which, his
equestrian statue in brass was erected in the church. David,
his grandson, enlarged the revenues belonging to the priory
in the year 1235, and was made a Knight, but was killed in
the year 1262."

David de Cardigan was prior in the reign of King Henry
III. and John de Barry in the following reign.°

The possessions belonging to this house were, in the 16th
year of Queen Elizabeth, granted for the term of 21 years to

| Smith's Cork, vol. 1., p. 253. ™ Smith's Cork, vol. 1, p. 281. ™ Lodge, vol. 1,
194,195. ° King, p. 218.

‘Abbey Mahon—The ruins of Abbey Mahon are close to the bay of Court Mac
Sherry, in the parish of Abbey Mahon, in the barony of Ibane and Barryroe, to
which it gives name. It is one mile and a half E. S. E. from Timol e, in the
County of Cork. This parish is situated on the north-west side of Court Mac
Sherry bay on the south coast. It formerly constituted part of the parish
of Lisle, from which it was separated on the erection of an abbey by some Cis-
tertian monks, which stood close to the shore, and was endowed by Lord Barry
with eighteen ploughlands, but was not entirely complete at the general suppres-
Sion of monasteries when its possessions were seized by the crown and granted to
the Boyle family, and are still the property of the Earl of Shannon.

3 Abbey Shrewry was situated in the parish of Abbey Shrewry, on the northern
bank of the river IIen, one mile west of Skibbereen, in the eastern division of the
barony of West Carbery, in the county of Cork. This parish is situated near
the southern coast on the road from Cork to Baltimore, and is intersected by the
river IIen, on the north of which may be seen the ruins of this religious house
from which it took its name.

3 Ballybeg—The venerable remains of this monastery, known as the Abbey of
St. Thomas, are situated on the river Awbeg, about one mile from Buttevant, in
the parish of Ballybeg, in the barony of Orrery and Kilmore, county of Cork.

