--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-271.png ---
County of Down. 239

At the suppression of religious houses, this priory and its
possessions were seized upon by the O’Neils, on whose rebel-
lion the abbey, &c., became vested in the crown, and King
James I., granted the same to James Viscount Clandeboys,
who assigned them to the Lord Ardes; but in 1639 they were
awarded to the see of Armagh."

Breatain ;> St. Loarne,who had been a disciple of St. Patrick,
and died about the year 540, was bishop or abbot of Inreathan
in Lethcathuil, or the barony of Lecale ; it is now called Brea-
tain, and is only a castle and seat of a nobleman near the
town of Down ; it was so at least about the year 1630.*

* Harris Tabl. * Tr. Th., p. 19 and 20.

5 Breatain is now called Bright—The site of the ancient church of Bright is
occupied by the Protestant church. We are told in the ‘‘ Tripartite Life of St.
Patrick” that the saint, after his unsuccessful mission to his old master, Milcho, at
Slemish, returned to Saul, whence he set out southwards, to convert a prince
named Ros, who was the brother of Dichu, his first convest at Saul. The account
of this mission, as given in the ‘‘ Irish Tripartite,” lately published by Miss Cusack,
is as follows:—‘ Patrick went subsequently from Sabhall southwards, that he
might preach to Ros, son of Trichim. He it was that resided in Derlus, to the
south of Dun-leth-glaise (Downpatrick). There is a small city (Cathair,
i.¢., civitas, but also meaning a bishop’s see) there this day, #.e., Brettain, where is
Bishop Loam, who dared to chide Patrick for holding the hand of the boy who
was playing near his church. As Patrick was then on his way he saw a tender

outh herding pigs—Mochae his name. Patrick preached to him and baptised
im, and cut his hair (tonsured him), and gave him a copy of the Gospels and a
reliquary. And he gave him also another time a bachall (a crozier) which had
been given them from God, —viz., its head into Patrick’s bosom, and this is the
Detech—Mochae of Noendruim (Mahee Island, in Strangford Lough), and
Mocha promised Patrick a shorn pig every year, and this, indeed, is still given.” |
The fort, “ Derlus,” which in some of the lives is also named Inreathan, was an
earthen rath which stood probably where now is the Castle of Bright, for the
Anglo-Normans in Lecale generally selected raths as sites for their castles. The
word ‘‘ Durlas” is translated by O’Donovan ‘‘a strong fort.” He says that it
is Anglicised into Thurles. Ros, son of Trichim, the prince of Bright, was a very
important personage. He was a doctor of the Berla Feini, or the most ancient
form of the Irish 1 age, and he was one of the nine commissioners appointed
to draw up the Senchus Mor, one of the ancient laws which was so much revered
that the Irish judges, called Brehons, were not authorized to abrogate anything
contained in it. The original has been lately published by the Brehon Law
Commissioners. The festival of Ross was held on the 7th of April. There
is not any ancient well close to the church of Bright, such as is generall
to be found in the vicinity of ancient churches, but the townland in whicl
it is situated is named lintubber—the town of the well—from a_re-
markable well about a quarter of a mile to the north of the church, which
probably is the ancient holy well where was baptised Ros-Mac-Trichim.
it. Loarn, who was Bishop of Bright, was honoured in the ancient Irish Church
with a festival on the 11th of September. I do not know anything more than is
related in the ‘Irish Tripartite Life” regarding St. Loar chiding St. Patrick,
nor have we any account of St. Loam’s successors in the See of Bright, but it
would seem that at whatever time it merged into the See of Down the lands
attached to it passed into the possession of the Bishops of Down. John Don-
gan, who became Bishop of Down in 1395, with the assent of his chapter and
. Clergy, assigned eight messu: and four carucates of land in Bright and
Rasteglas (Rossglass), to Janico D’Artois, a Gascon gentleman, who had attended
Richard II. in his Irish wars, The assignment appears by an inquisition held

