--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-141.png ---
County of Cork. 115

A.D. 685. The abbot Russin died April 7th, he was the
son of Lappaius.®

733. Died Selbac, the comorb of St. Barr.»

goo. Historians relate, that about this time there were

8 Act. SS. p. 150. » War. Bish. p. 556. .
priests in Ireland, by order from the Pope, have the privilege of saying two Masses
in one day, by reason of the great extent of most parishes or unions.”

Some of the details of this MS. of Dive-Downes are full of interest, and throw
considerable light on the condition of Ireland, and especially of the See of Cork,
about the year 1700. Thus he tells us that £20 was given at the time for
bringing in a Tory. Again, that Teigue Dash was prosecuted for having a
harper Pisying in his house on Sunday.—‘‘In the parish of ‘Ardnageeh 5
David Terry, Papist, gives the seventh part of his milk to the poor. In
Abbeysrowry, the rector or vicar usually demands, besides his burying fees,
when the man of the family, or widow, dies worth £5, the sum of 13s. 4d. as
a mortuary ; if the man dies worth less than £5, they demand his second-best
suit of clothes, or 6s. 8d. in lieu thereof. In Dromdal ¢ parish, Felix
M ‘Carthy is priest 5 he was here before the late troubles. A Protestant school-
master complains that Papiststeach publick school in this parish. In Caharagh
parish’tis thought that there are forty Papists for one Protestant; William Guricheen,
a very old man, is priest there. In Cannaway parish—no church, no Protestants—
there are the ruins of a house inthe churchyard ; there is a vault whole ; the priest
built an altar in it about a year ago, when some person of note was buried. enis
Sweeney is Popish priest of this parish and Macromp.” Of Durrus, he writes—‘‘ St.
Faughnan is the patron saint of this parish, Not far from Bantry, by the sea-
side, are the ruins of an abbey which belonged to the Franciscans. I don’t hear
that there were any other religious houses besides this in the barony of Beera and
Bantry. Humphrey Sullivan is Popish priest of this parish and of Kilcroghan ; he
has been here about twelve years. All the inhabitants are Papists. No Papists
are allowed to live within the walls of Bandon. The Earl of Cork in his leases
has obliged all the tenants not to admit Papists. In the parish of Skull, there are
about four Protestant families, and about four hundred Papist families. Daniel
Carthy is Popish priest of the eastern part of this parish ; he has been here ever
since before the late troubles. No glebe in this parish, no Registry-book, nor Bible,
nor Common Prayer-book. In Kilmoe, there are the ruins of a chapel at the
west-end of the town, dedicated to St. Mullagh, The church of Kilmoe is
dedicated to St. Briana, a/ias Brandon, whose festival is observed in this parish;
there are about nine Protestant families, and two hundred Papist, Teige Coghlen
is Popish priest of Kilmoe and of the western part of Skull; he has been here
about eight years. A young Irishman, a Papist, teaches school about the
middle of the parish. In all the O’Sullivan’s country they observe as a holiday
*St. Rooane’s Day.’ At Kinneigh, a high round tower stands in the south-west
corner of the churchyard. ’Tis supposed this church was formerly a cathedral. A
stone is in the south-west corner of the church of Kinneigh, counted very sacred,
which the Irish solemnly swear upon. The church is accounted by the Irish
very sacred. There is a tradition that formerly in this churchyard there was a
well that had great medicinal virtues, and that the concourse of people being
very chargeable to the inhabitants, they stopped it up. In Murragh, Daniel
Hurley, a quiet man, is Popish priest of this and three or four contiguous

ishes ; there are ‘more Protestants than Papists; there was a registry lately
ight, and a Bible, and two Common Prayer-books. In Desertsurgis there
are one hundred and fifty families of Protestants ; no Popish schoolmaster in this
parish 3 & Bible and Common Prayer-book lately bought. Denis Mahony is

opish priest of this parish.”

¢ County of Cork Grand Jury Presentments, at the close of the 17th
century, detail some facts of the deepest interest. In 1687, they present—‘‘ That
the Protestant clergy, under colour of law, exact fromthe Roman Catholick subjects
several sums of christening, purification, burying, and book money, and sue them in

