--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-280.png ---
248 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

mother, all his predecessors and successors, Beatrice de Villers,
his own, Africa his wife, and of all that had died or should
die in his service, he granted the ferry of the Lough of Strang-
ford, towards the Duffren; the ferry of Carlingford ; the ferry
of Cragfergus and that of the Bann; and all the ferries in his
several conquests in Ireland, that between Lethcathel and
Arte alone excepted: Witnesses, M. bishop of Down; R.
bishop of Connor; E. abbot of Ynes; G. abbot of Holm; P.
abbot of Saul; G. prior of St. Thomas ; P. prior of Muckmor;

feet and a half wide, and placed on a level with the surface of the ground.” The
ground around the round tower must have been raised by the accumulation of
rubbish, for the doors of such towers are placed at a considerable height—that of
the tower of Kilmacduagh is placed at an elevation of twenty-six feet from the
ground. The destruction of this venerable monument of antiquity was determined
on in consequence of the rivalry between Lord Downshire and Lord de Clifford.
The latter, who was proprietor of the tower, opposed this piece of vandalism ; but
Lord Downshire, taking advantage of his rival's absence, caused it to be pulled
down, under pretence that its fall might endanger the cathedral. This occurred
in the Autumn of 1789. When the towerwas thrown down a wall was discovered
running directly across its site, which was supposed to have been the foundation of
an earlier church,

A.D. 1026—“ Maolpatrick O'Alecain, lector of Dunlethglas, died.”

A.D. 1043—‘‘ Flaithbhertach, bishop of Dunlethglas, died.”

A.D. 1048—“Gillacoluin O'Heighnigh, lord of Airghialla, died, and was in-
terred at Dun-da-Leathglas.”

A.D. 1043—‘‘ Ecmarcach, son of Cernach, erenach of Dunlethglas, went on a
pilgrimage.”

A.D. 1067—“ Scolaige, son of Indrechtach, erenach of Mucknoe (county
Monaghan), and the erenach of Dunlethglas, died.”

A.D, 1068—* Domhnall O’Cathusaich, erenach of Dun, died.”

A.D. 1069—‘* Dun-da-leathglas was burned.”

A.D. 1078—* Senoir. son of Mal-Molua, chief anchorite of Ireland, ended his
days in peace at Dundalethglas.”

A.D. 1083—‘‘ Muircertach O’Cairill, erenach of Dun, the most learned judge
and historian of Ireland, died.”

A.D, 1086—“ Maolkevin, venerable bishop of Ulidia (Down), died.”

A.D. 1089—O'Cernach, comarba of Dundalethglas. rested in Christ.”

A.D. 1099—‘“‘ Diarmaid O’Maolathgen, erenach of Dun, died on Easter night.”

A.D. 1102—“ Cooey O'Cairill, erenach of Dun, died.”

A.D. 1111—* Dun-da-leathglas was burned, both fort and trian, by lightning.” —
Trian signifies the third part. or a division of a town, but it seems frequently to
signify the part occupied by the inhabitants as distinguished from the military or
the clergy.

‘AD y— Maolmaire, bishop of Dunda-lethglas, died.”

A.D. 1136—‘ Maolmaedog (St. Malachy) O’Morgair retired from the cowar-
pate of Patrick (Primacy) to serve God.” It was to Down that St. Malachy re-
tired, where he established a house of Regular Canons which is supposed to have
been on the site now occupied by the old jail.

A.D. 1157—‘ Cuuladh O Duinsleibhe O Eochadra, King of Ulidia, died, after
penance, at J)un-da-leathghlas, and was interred at Dun itself.”

A.D. 1158—‘‘Gilla Odar O’Cathusaich, erenach of Dundaleathghlas,” was a
subscribing witness to the charter granted by Muircheartach MacLoughlin to the
Abbey of Newry, about the year 1158.

A.D. 1177—** Cardinal Vivian arrived in Ireland.” He was sent by Pope
Alexander III., as Apostolic Legate. After having remained during Christmas
with Gothred, King of the Isle of Man, he arrived at Downpatrick after Epiphany.
** An army was led by John de Courcy and the knights into Dalaradia and to

