--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-253.png ---
County of Down. 221

Ardicnise ;? there was a friary of Franciscans here,? but
the time of its foundation is not known.

Bangor ,* or the White Choir ; it was called anciently the
Vale of Angels ; it is a seaport, market, and borough town in
the barony of the Ards.

Abbey of Canons Regular; A.D. 516. St. Comgall was
born in Ulster of noble parentage, and was educated under
St. Fintan, in Clonenagh.*

555. About this time he founded here a celebrated abbey ;>
where in this year Cormac, King of South Leinster, took on
him the cowl ; and died A.D. 567.°

St Flann was abbot here, we cannot say at what time ; but
his feast is cornmemorated on the 15th of December.?

* War. Mon. * Usher. »Id., p. 451. ° Walsh's Prospect, p. 227. 4 Butler,
vol. 12, p. 246.

tery which once was enclosed in a rath. The bodies were interred in graves lined
with flag-stones, and a large granite stone stood in the cemetery, but it has been
rolled into a stream which bounds the field ; on this stone is inscribed a simple
cross formed by the intersection of two.pair of parallel lines. Mr. Savage, who
is not accountable for the barbarous removal of the incised stone, has promised to
have it rolled back to its original position, This site exactly corresponds with
that of the Church of St. Cillen, as described by Angus, the Culdee. It is in the
territory of Lecale, and it is close to the estuary of Dundrum, while it adjoins the
lands attached to the Church of Maghera, which would account for the expression
in the Patent Roll, “ Rathmurvul (Maghera) along with Rathscillan.”

The name Cillen assumes among our Irish saints the forms of Kelan and
Caolan, the latter of which, as derived from Caol, ‘‘ narrow,” is stated by Colgan
to have been a common appellation, denoting ‘*‘slenderness of figure ;” and no
doubt the diminutive form Caolan was used to express affection towards the saint.
This change of the name accounts for the name given to the site of St. Cillen’s
Church, by Aingus, the Culdee, who calls him ‘‘ Cillen of Achadhcail (the field
of the slender man.”)

It seems probable that St. Senan belonged to some other place called Achadh-
caoil.

3 Ardicnise, now called Holywood, which see.

3 Bangor —Keating. in his History of Ireland—that wonderful repertory of bardic
stories—thus accounts for the origin of the name Bangor :—‘ Breasal Breac, King of
Leinster, went with an army to plunder Scotland, and he brought many cows and
herds of cattle with him’ into Ireland; and, after he and his forces landed, they
formed an encampment in the place which is now called Bangor, and
slaughtered a great number of the cattle there, until a considerable number of
the Beanna, i.¢., the horns of the cows, were scattered over the plain; so that
the place ever since bore the name of Magh Beannchoir—the plain of the
horns. A long time after that, when the holy abbot Comgall erected the monas-
tery of Bangor in the same spot, he gave the name of the place in which it
was erected to it, viz.—Beannchor, so that it has retained it ever since.” Bangor
is popularly supposed to mean White Choir, and is so explained by Ware,
Harris, De Burgo, and I may even add Colgan; but the learned Dr. Reeves is.
inclined to believe that the true root of the name is to be found in the Celtic word
Beanna—horns. A monk who had come to Ireland with the Anglo-Normans,
named Jocelin—an industrious collector of all the strange traditions respecting St.
Patrick, that had floated down the stream of time, tells the following story regard-
ing him :—‘‘ He turned, for the sake of rest for himself and his holy company,
unto a certain hill situated in a valley, where afterwards was builded the monas-
tery of Beannchor, and, sitting there, they beheld the valley filled with heavenly
light, and with a multitude of the host of heaven, and they heard, as chanted forth

