--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-309.png ---
County of Down. 273

lower ; the cells, dormitory, &c., are all in ruins, and part of
the west end is fitted up for church service.‘

Hollywood ;* on the bay of Carrickfergus, three miles north-
east of Belfast. A monastery was founded here for friars of
the third order of St. Francis ;# we know not to whom it owed
its origin, although M. Allemande, without the least authority,
gives it to one of the Annesleys, which family was not settled
in the north of Ireland until long after the final suppression
of monasteries.

Inquisition, 5th November, Ist King James, finds that Con-
nogher O'Hamle, the last prior, voluntarily resigned on Ist of
January, 33d King Henry VIII., being then seized of the said
priory, &c.; also of the five townlands following, viz., Balle-
keyll, alias Ballecexell, Ballamanacke, Ballacaltricke, alias
Ballacktragath, Ballackderrye, and Ballaer-knocknegonye, the
whole of the annual value of 235. 4d.

Iniscourcey ;4 a peninsula, opposite to Downpatrick, and
running into the Lough of Strangford. Sir John de Courcey,

* Hist. County of Down, pp. 49 and 50. “ War. Mon.

% Hollywood recte Holywood.—Ballekeyll, now Ballykeel ; Ballamanacke, now
Ballymenoch; Ballacaltricke, now Cultra; Ballaoderrye, now Holywood;
Ballaer-Knochnegonye, now Knocknagoney.

Father MacCana in his * Itinerary,” after writing of the ancient church of Knock-
columbkill—says ‘‘ At no great distance from this, on the east, is a monastery of
the Third Order of Saint Francis, founded by the munificence of the same chief
(Niall O’Neill, chief of Trian Congall), and adequately endowed with lands.
This is called in Irish Aird-mic-nissi, in Latin Collis Sancti Mac Nissi. It is on
the bank of Loch Laodh (Belfast Lough), and stands opposite Karrickfergus on
the south.” This fully identifies the present Holywood as the Ardicnise, which
Archdall gives as a separate friary. The Calendar of Aengus, at the 25th
of October, when treating of the name Laisren mor-mac Nascai, (Laisren
the Great, son of Nasca), adds in the gloss, “ Laisren, the son of Nasca, of
Ard Mac Nasca, on the shore of Lough Laigh.” This Laisren. the patron saint
of Holywood, was a distinguished ecclesiastic in the middle of the seventh
century. He studied the science of the saints along with his two brothers, under
St. Carthagh. in the monastery of Raithin. He is the Laistranus, the presbyter,
who is mentioned in the superscription of the letter from the clergy of Rome to
the Irish Church, which is given in the Ven. Bede’s Ecclesiastical History.
Previous to the thirteenth century the place had acquired the name Sanctus
Boscus (Holywood), while it was called by the people Ballyderry, but its ancient name
continued to be used occasionally ; a pedigree of the O’Neills, cited by Stuart,
states that they granted the lands of Ard McCriosq (recte Ard McNiosq), or
Holywood tothe Gilmores. The walls of the old church still remain.

¥ Jniscourcey.—Nearly opposite to Downpatrick is the island of Inch, which
has been rendered almost a peninsula by means of an embankment which stops
the tide water of Lough Strangford. This island in ancient times was called
Iniscouscry (the island of Couscry)—J#is Cumhscraidh—so named seemingly from
Cumhscraidh, one of the sons of Conor Mac Nessa, King of Ulster, who suc-
ceeded his father on the throne of Ulster. and was slain after a three years’ reign
in the year of our Lord 33. Harris, and after him Archdall, supposed that the
Cistercian Abbey founded by De Courcy, was the earliest church erected on the
island, and that this island was named Iniscouscry from the Norman conqueror.
Dr. O’Donovan was, however, enabled by our ancient records to correct those
mistakes. In the Calendar of the Saints of Ireland, at the 22nd of July, is given

T


