--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-188.png ---
162 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland,

The abbot St. Congell, or Comgall, flourished about the
year 580,' and St. Colman, or Mocholmoc, another abbot of
this once celebrated monastery, died 30th March, A.D. 699."

Camus is now a parish church in the diocess of Derry.‘

Coleraine ;> A market-town and borough, sending burgesses
to Parliament ; it is situated on the river Bann, within five
miles of the sea, in the ancient territory of O’Cahane.

* Usher. * Act. SS., p.792. * Visitation Book.

maintained till the tenth century. The Annals of the Four Masters in 938,
record the appointment of ‘‘ Muircertach of Camus” to the Abbacy of Bangor. In
the Martyrology of Donegal, October 30th, we find commemorated ‘‘St. Colman,
abbot of Camus Comghail, on the banks of the Bann,” and again on January 22nd,
**SS. Colma, Bogha and Laisri in Camas Comghail.” The following particulars
regarding this ancient monastic establishment are given by Dr. Reeves in his
notes to Adamnan, 1. 50 :—‘‘ Camus gave name to a parish situate on the west of
the Bann, in the diocese of Derry, which, for distinction’s sake, is called Camus
juxta Bunn, there being another of the same name in the Tyrone part of the
diocese, styled, from the neighbouring river, Camus juxta Mourne. An island in
the Bann, opposite the churchyard of Camus, was formerly called Jnis Lochain,
beside which was a shallow spot, known as Frartas Camsa, t.e., ‘the Ford of
Camus,’ from which the island is called ‘Enis Forsed,’ on Speed’s Map of
Ulster. In the twelfth century an abbey was founded in another part of the parish,
called in Cisterician records, De Claro Fonte, but by the Irish Magh-Cosgrain,
which now gives to the whole parish, according to civil usage, on the Ordnance
Survey, the name Macosguin. All traces of the church have disappeared from the
cemetery of Camus ; but an ancient sculptured cross or pillar, divided by trans-
verse bands into four compartments, each containing three figures in relief, stood
on a base at the west side till 1760, when it was overturned, and, having been
mutilated, was converted into a gatepost for the churchyard, in which condition it
still exists, The name Camus is supposed to be compounded of Cam, and as, two
Irish words, which mean ‘‘ crooked stream,” and in Ireland there are twelve
townlands of itsname. In Scotland it is sometimes Camus, as in Argyleshire,
and sometimes Camdus, as in Lanark and Perthshire. Adamnan, when recording
the fulfilment of a prophecy of St. Columba, that the fountain at Dun-Cethirm
would one day be reddened with the blood of one of his own tribe, adds, that ‘‘a
soldier of Christ, named Fintan, who for many years had led without reproach an
heremitical life at Durrow, related to him (Adamnan), that he himself had found
a lifeless trunk lying in that fountain, and that he on the same day proceeded tothe
monastery of St. Comgall, which in the Irish language is called Camdos (eo die ad
monasterium Sancti Comgelli quod Scotice dicitur Caméos), and there related the
fulfilment of St. Columba’s prophecy.”— Vita S. Col. 1—5o.

5 Coleraine, formerly called Culerathin, is situated on the east side of the Bann.
Lewis says that it derives its name from the words ‘‘ Cuil-Rathuin, descriptive of
the numerous forts in the vicinity, and is, by some writers, identified with the Rath-
mor-Muigheline, the royal seat of the Kings of Dalnaraidhe.”—(Zofogr. Dict.)
O’Brien, however, in his Irish dictionary, derives it from Cusl-rathain, ‘ the ferny
corner,” and the ancient Tripartite Life of St. Patrick confirms this derivation.
It is there related that our Apostle having arrived in this neighbourhood, was hos-
pitably entertained, and received an offer of some land for the erection of a church
in a tract overgrown with ferns, and where some boys were at the moment engaged
in setting fire to the ferns. St. Patrick left St. Carbreus there as Bishop, and
“from that day and circumstance it was called Cuil-raithen, i.e., ‘secessus filicis,’

. the ferny retirement.”—Trias Thaum, page 147. Tirechan also, in Book of Ar-
magh, fol. 15, relates that ‘* St. Patrick crossing the river Bann, blessed the spot in
which is the cell of Cuile-Raithin in Elniu, and a bishop was placed there, and he
erected many other cells in Elniu.” Towards the close of the sixth century, St.
Conall was bishop of Cuserathin, and Adamnan relates that St. Columba visiting

