--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-062.png ---
44 Ancient Monasteries of [reland.

of Tyrnarnunagell ; the fourth-part of the townland of Tul-
laghloyst ; the fourth-part of the townland of Enaghboy ; the
third-part of the townland of Aghanoyce ; the third-part of
the townland of Tullaghelmayne ; and the sixth part of the
townland of Downalloghe; all near the town of Armagh ; and
a parcel of land called Knock Ederyn, lying near to the abbey;
these were the mensal lands belonging thereto. He was seized
also of the townlands of Ballyleanmore, Clawdoughe, Kille-
meky, Ballyleanbegge, Dromvolly, the third part of Ancagh,
in the parish of Clonkarney ; Ballyneydarragh, Drountee,
Lourgowergh, Ballyvically, Downlyr, Cavanaghan, Prosna-
whyghe, in the parish of Clonkoughrose ; Crecanmore, Fallee,
Correcleigh, Aghagoran, Tassaagh, Tearrarlee, Crewroe, in the
parish of Tueaghy, all in the same county.

The lands of Cloghan, Corraghe, Cloghum, Tullough
O’Sarran, Aughan O'’Cloyghy, Crcssereen, Moulegournagh,
near Armagh, towards Clonall ; and all the tithes of the said
lands, and of ten shillings Irish money, annually at the feast
of All Saints, out of each of the townlands above mentioned ;
and the abbot and his convent, with all their servants and
officers, had yearly on the feast of St. Philip and St. James,
an entertainment provided them out of all the aforesaid lands.
The abbot was also seized of a grange, containing the two
townlands of Corheenan, in the parish of Tynan, and the
townland of Clonarb, in the said parish ; and the advowson of
the church, and a townland belonging thereto, called Mauger-
grene, in the parish of Clankan, and the annual rent of twenty-
one shillings and fourpence out of Daughleernhan, in the said
parish, on the feast of All Saints.t

James O’Donelly was the last prior, for an inquisition taken
the first of November, in the first year of Queen Elizabeth,
1557, finds that he had surrendered the abbey, being then
seized of the site thereof, whereon there was a large church,
some stone chambers, a dormitory, with cellars beneath it, an
hall, a storehouse, a great court, a cemetery, garden and
orchard. A parcel of land called Garry, Templemurry, and
Garrynenamus; a parcel containing acres in Knockadrain,
Dromcoote, Lurgaboyourah, Aghamoote, the grange of the
townland of Lurgaboy in Clanconnaghy, townland of Drom-
nemuickee, Tallynemalloroogh, Mullinesillagh, grange of
Bally M‘Cally in Clanconnoghy, Broaghucclogh. Leatery,
Inclonconnoghy, Lurgalachtnemingle, Tullaghbofin, grange of
Sessiaghneogrechanphy, Carnevanaghran, townland of Riesky-
roddeh, Foallee, Fullynory, Tyranegargill, Aghanore, Knock-

"King, p. 233.

