--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-089.png ---
County of Cavan. 69

The church yard of this priory has been for many years a
famous burial place, and there is a round tower remaining in it.

Killachad. An abbey was founded here for canons regular
by St. Tigernach, a different person from the St. Tigernach
of Clunes.4

A. D. 800. This monastery was destroyed by fire.®

805. St. Tigernach, the founder, died November 4th.!

St. Macerco of Killachad, his feast is celebrated on the 28th
of November, but we cannot find the time when he flourished.¢

826. Died the abbot Abner.*

843. The Danes of Dublin plundered this abbey, at which
time Nuad, the son of Segene, one of the religious belonging
to it, obtained the crown of martyrdom.!

844. Died Robhertach, or Robert, a scribe of this abbey.*

869. Died Dubthachus, another scribe.!

873. Died Robhertach O’Kearta, who was also a scribe.™

919. Died the abbot Cellach, the son of Congal."

937- The Abbey was plundered this year,° and in two years
after it suffered the same from Ceallachan, King of Cashel,
accompanied by the Danes of Waterford.P

1030. Died Malodharius, the blind, the professor of divinity
in this monastery.4

After the departure of King Henry IT. from this kingdom, the
English plundered this abbey and many other religious houses.*

Kilmore in the 6th century, St. Columb founded the

44ct, SS. p. 796. *Tr. Th. index, *Act. SS. p.796. *Vard. Vita Rumoldi,
hAnnal. Ulton. ‘Act. SS.~.373. Tr. Th. p. 633. *Act. SS. p. 334. \Act. SS. p. 334.
™ld, "Id. °Tr. Th. p. 633. PAnn. Inisfal. 4Tr. Th. p. 633. *Annal. Inisfal.

* Kilmore, The feast of St. Fedlimidh the patron of the see of Kilmore is
celebrated on the 9th of August. Lynch in his MS. History of the Irish Bisho)
thus speaks of this Saint: “S. Fedhlimidus saeculo sexto Kilmorae floruit frater g
Dermicii Innis-clochranensis Abbatis : eum conjicio in Regesto Clochorensi Clu-
ainensem Episcopum dici, Cluainae nimirum illius ad Emilacum sitae quam nos
Cluneis (Clones) dicimus ubi Fedhlimidus cum S. Tigernacho primo illius sedis-
Episcopo sepultus esse traditur. Ejus obitum ad 9. Augusti Martyrologia
nostra referunt.” (fol. 191.) In the Martyrology of Donegal on the 9th
of August we find the heading in Latin, ‘‘ Movemdecem Sancti Kilmorenses,
quae Cathedralis Sedes est, uno die coluntur,” and amongst these saints is re-
gistered ‘‘Feidhlimidh of Kill-mor Dithruibh: Deidi, daughter of Trena, son
of Dubhthach hua Lughair, was his mother.” All this seems to make it
sufficiently clear that the church which gave name to the see of Kilmore was
known in early times as Kilmore Dithruibh. Dr. Reeves, indeed, in a note to the
Martyrology of Donegal, at 8th of August, says that it is “‘a serious blunder” to identify
Killmor-dithruibh with Kilmore in the County Cavan, and he refers to his notes on
Adamnan, page 99, for the proofs of his assertion. All these proofs however are
reduced to a mere conjecture of O'Donovan in Annals of F. M. page 328. Such
conjecture when unsupported by any evidence can have no weight against the
statement of our Martyrologies, and against the constant tradition of the see itself,
which venerates its patron on the 9th of August. Colgan also in his note 108 to
the Life of St. Columbkille expressly states that “A's/l-mor Dithruibh est sedes
Episcopalis in regione Breffniae, seu comitatu de Cavan.” (77. 7h. page 381.)

The word Dithruibh is supposed to mean a wilderness or solitude, and this

