--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-274.png ---
242 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

Cluaindaimh ;” in Huechia. There was an abbey here in
the early ages, of which St. Mochoemoc, or Mochommoc, was
abbots

8 Cumber »» or Comerer ; a poor village on a branch of the
Lough of Strangford, and three miles south west of that town,
in the barony of Castle Reagh. St. Patrick founded an abbey
here, of which we have no further account ;! but Brien Catha
Dun, from whom the O’Niels of Clandeboys descended, built
one to the honour of the Virgin Mary, and supplied it with
monks, of the Cistertian order, from the abbey of Alba landa
in Carmarthenshire* The founder fell by the sword of Sir
John de Courcey, about the year 1201.' John O’Mullegan
was the last abbot, and he voluntarily resigned in the year

1543."

Inquisition 5th November, 1st King James, finds, that John
O’Mullegan, the last abbot, was, on Ist of August, 35th King
Henry VIII., seized of seven townlands, both in spirituals and
temporals, circumjacent to the abbey, viz., Ballemonostar,
Ballengona, Ballealletnegan, Ballestoger, Ballengam, Ballen-

t The baronies of Upper and Lower Iveagh. & Act. SS., p. 598. % Was called
anciently Domnach Commuir. | Tr. Th., pp. 95, 114, and 270. * Pembridge’s
Ann, War. Mon. ™ Hist. County of Down, p. 269.

7 Cluaindaimk, now Clonduff,a parish in the diocese of Dromore.—See Reeves’
Eccles. Antig., p. 115.

8 Cumber, now Comber,— Father Edmund MacCanna says in his ‘‘Itinerary”:—
“Previous to the outbreak of heresy, there were two monasteries here commonly
called the Black and the White, from the colour of the garments worn by the in-
mates of these houses. I saw a monk of the White Abbcy, that is, of the order
of St. Bernard, who commonly went by the name of the White Monk. When
weighed down with years, and an exile from his abode, he was murdered in Clan-
Cania, a territory of Tyrone, by the ruthless enemies, the Scots, in the year of our
salvation 1643. Of these monasteries not even the ruins remain, for a colony of
Scots who settled there employed the stones of them for building houses for them-
selves, so great is the passion of heretics for demolishing sacred objects.” The
old church of Comber, on the site of which the new one has been erected, was
considered to have been a part of the old monastery. In the Life of St. Patrick
(Colg. Trias Thaum., p. 147), he is said to have founded a church called Domh-
nach Combuir, and the Annals of Ulster, at 1031, relate that an army was led by
MacEochay as far as Iveagh, which burned Killcummar, with the oratory ; killed
four of the clergy, and carried away thirty captives. This may have been a com-
munity of Regular Canons, which continued to the ‘‘ Reformation,” and was
called the Black Abbey. Archdall is evidently mistaken regarding the founders of
the Cistercian monastery. It was not built by Brian-Catha-Duin O’Neill,
or any other of that family, who did not effect a settlement in the county
of Down for nearly a century after the date assigned for its foundation. Brian was
slain in the battle of Down A.D. 1260, fighting against the Lord Justice, Stephen de
Longespey. The foundation is attributed to the Whites by Allemande. The year
118 is the date assigned in an old Cistercian catalogue (Butler's Grace's An.,
Pp. 170). At the dissolution it was possessed of four peace townlands, with the
tithes of five others, and the rectories and advowsons of four parishes, viz.. Tawn-
aghneeve, or Saintfield, Templenelafin, in Island Magee, Killmood, and Ballyma-
geehan, which is now incorporated in the parish of Comber. All its possessions
were granted by the Crown to Sir James Hamilton.

