--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-299.png ---
County of Down. 2603

Franciscan Friary; this monastery, which was founded
about the year 1240, by Hugh de Lacie, Earl of Ulster,° is

° War. Mon.

gallsheagh.” About the year 1395, Janico d’Artois, a Gascon knight, obtained
“two messuages and one carucate in Nuntown, by the gift of the Priores’ and
Convent of the Blessed Mary of Down.” Nuntown is the present townland of
Ballynagallagh—the town of the nuns—in the parish of Bright, which still forms
a portion of the estate which, at the commencement of this century, belonged to
the Kildare family, the lineal representatives of Sir Janico. It is probable that the
Cistercian Convent occupied the site of the Church of St. Brigid, mentioned in
the following entry in the Annals of Ulster, at 1006 :—‘ Matadan, son of Donel,
King of Ulster, was killed by Turk in the Church of Brigid, in the middle of
Dundalethglas (Downpatrick).

The Franciscan Friary occupied the site of the Protestant parish church. Father
Edmund MacCanna, in his ‘‘ Irish Itinerary,” written shortly after 1643, says :—
‘«In the valley beneath, on the south-east (of the Mound), is a monastery of the
order of St. Francis, badly and inconveniently situated, for the ground is over-
grown with rushes and swampy,” From proximity to the friary, Bridge-street
was formerly called Fryar's-lane and Church-street, and the gardens adjoin-
ing it on the eastern side occupy what is marked Fryar’s Bog in the map of
1729. A MS. written by ‘‘ Fr. Franciscus Wardeus,” is preserved among the
documents lately removed to Dublin from the College of the Irish Franciscans
in Rome. It was written about the year 1630 in Louvain, and transferred
thence to Rome. That document says:—‘*The Convent of Down was
built in the episcopal and maritime city of Down, in Ulster, and was placed
in the custody (a portion of a Province) of Drogheda, by the General Chapter
of Narbonne, in the year 1260. From its first foundation it was always a
nursery of piety. It was here that John Duns Scotus, the subtle doctor, assumed.
the habit of the Franciscan Order, and he was called Duns from the name of his
native city, Down, which was thus abbreviated. The friars were first expelled from
this convent by John Brittan, an English Protestant, who, with a number of wicked
followers, invaded the place in the year 1569. The friars were apprised of his ap-
proach, and saved themselves by flight, but returned again ; and in the followin,
year, 1570, he made an attack on the convent, hanged all the friars he caught, an
almost totally destroyed the establishment, with the exception of the church, which
was kept as a court-house for the English judges of Assize. It remained desolate
from the time of its suppression till 1627, when Father John Matthew (Matheus,

thaps M‘Mahon), being provincial, a residence was erected in the vicinity.

‘ather Henry Melan, a theologian and excellent preacher, was appointed superior
of the new establishment ; he having discharged the offices of vicar, provincial,
diffinitor, and custos, continues to labour strenuously in the salvation of souls. The
foundation of this convent is attributed bysome to Africa, the daughter of the King
of Man (Godred), and widow of John de Courcy, Earl of Ulster; but I rather
think that the founder was Magennis, whose posterity now inherit the lordship of
Iveagh, and are branched out into several noble families. Magennis erected a family
sepulchre in this monastery.” A chapter was held here in the year 1313.
The name of the assailant of the poor friars was John Brereton (not Brittan). His
thirst for religious spoils impelled him to the convent, but the sacred vessels were
concealed, and three friars—John Loughran, Edmund Simmons, and Donat
O’Rorke—were his only prey. These the villains subjected to a variety of tortures,
and then strangled them from the branches of a large oak which grew near the
Spring of Glory, now called St. Dillan’s Well. This friary was founded, according
to Ware, about the year 1240, by Hugh de Lacy, Earl of Ulster. The great glory
of the Franciscan convent of Down was its real or supposed alumnus, fohn Duns
Scotus, the great philosopher and founder of the school of theologians, called from
him Scotists. The birthplace of Duns Scotus has been disputed against us by the
Scotch and English. Nearly all his biographers say that he was born in Lecale in
the year 1274. Fray Samiengo even defines the precise spot as being at “the ex-
tremity of a promontory,” which would seem to indicate Be John’s point. From

