--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-137.png ---
County of Cork. ut

day in commerce and wealth; it is a bishop’s see and a cor-
porate town, sending two burgesses to parliament.

St. Barr, Barroc, or Finbar, but by his parents named Lochan,
was of the race of the Ibriunratha; he flourished about the

St. Fintanus of Ros-coerach, St. Euhel de Roscoerach, St. Trellanus of Druim-
draighniche, St. Coelchuo, St. Mogenna, St. Modimochus, St. Sanctanus, and St.
Lugerius, son of Columb. All these, and many others that came from that very
celebrated school, by the merits of holiness and virtue, constructed cells in different
places, and consecrated themselves and all these to St. Barra, their father and
master, and his successors.” —( Acta Sanctorum, p. 607.)

The name of St. Findbarr holds a prominent place in the early history of the
Irish Church. St. Cuimin of Connor, in his poem on the characteristic virtues of
our saints, writes :—

“Fin-Barr, the torch of wisdom, loved
Humility towards all men ;
He never saw in pressing distress
Any one whom he would: not relieve.”

In the ancient list of Irish saints, which illustrates their lives by comparison with
the saints of other nations, St. Finbarr, who is styled ‘‘Bishop of Munster and
Connaught,” is placed in parallel with St. Augustine, the apostle of England.—
(Liber Hymnorum, 1.A.S., p. 70.)

The martyrology of Donegal marks St. Bairre's festival on the 25th of Sgptember.
The mart: logy of Tallaght on that day gives the feast of Barrind Corcaige, but

. adds, on the 26th of September vel hic, Barrind Corcaighe. In the famous Cata-
logue of the Three Orders of Irish Saints, published by Fleming and Usher, the
name of S. Barrindeus appears among the saints of the second order. Marianus
O'Gorman, in his metrical martyrology, prays : .

‘May the noble Baire from Corcach
Be before me to the great land,
For he is blooming-sweet to the poor.”

St. AEngus, in his Feliré, also commemorates, on the 25th of September—

‘The solemnity of the beloved man,
The festival of Bairre from Corcach.””

And the note is added in the Leabhar Breac;:—‘‘ This is the festival of Bairre
from Corcach: he was of the race of Brian, son of Eochaidh Muidhmhedhoinn,
and it is in Achadh Cill-Clochair, or Drochait, in Aird-Uladh on this day with
Bairre.” There is evidently an omission in this note, which is thus supplied in the
Roman MS. of the Féliré :—‘‘Of the race of Brian Mac Eochaidh M. was Bairre
of Corcach, and it is in Achadh Cill-Clochair, or at Drochait in Aird-Uladh, that
his festival is kept ; or it is the feast of Iomchadh that is kept in Cill-Clochair at
Ard-Uladh on this day with Bairre.”

Two ancient Latin Tives of St. Finbarr were published by Mr. Caulfield in 1864.
In the Irish life preserved in the Brussels Ms. the virtues of the saint are thus
compendiated :—‘‘His humility, his piety, his charity, his abstinence, his prayers
by day and by night, won him great privileges: for he was godlike and pure of
heart and mind, like Abraham; mild and well-doing, like Moyses; a psalmist, like
David; wise, like Solomon; firm in the faith, like Peter ; devoted to the truth, like
Paul the Apostle; and full of the Holy Spirit, like John the Baptist. He wasa
lion of strength, and an orchard full of apples of sweetness. When the time of his
death arrived, after erecting churches and monasteries to God, and appointing over
them bishops, priests, and other degrees, and baptising and blessing districts and
people, Barra went to Kill-na-Cluana (.¢., Cloyne), and with him went Fiana, at
the desire of Cormac and Baoithin, where they consecrated two churches. Then
he said, ‘It is time for me to quit this corporeai prison, and to go to the heavenly

