--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-288.png ---
256 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

1380. About this time it was enacted by Parliament, that
no mere Irishman should be admitted to profess himself in
this abbey.” Same year, John Rosse was prior ; it is observ-
able that this man’s character was marked with almost every
vice ; and in this year he obtained the King’s pardon, on the
payment of the fine of six marcs, for all treasons, transgres-
sions, felonies, extortions, usurpations, and excesses whatso-
ever, whereof he had been indicted ;* he obtained the bishop-
rick of Down in 1387, and died in 1394.%

1413. John Cely, the prior, was made bishop of Down, but
twenty-eight years afterwards he was deprived of his see, being
found guilty of adultery and other atrocious crimes.*

1442. William Stawley was prior.*

1526. The Prior Glaisne, who was abbot of Newry and of
Saul, and son of Hugh M‘Gennis, was slain by Donell Oge and
his brothers, sons of Donell M‘Gennis.”

~ King, p. 93. *id. 7 War. Bps., p 201. "Id., p. 202. *Id., p. 223.
= Ann. Four Masters. .
that many other sacred monuments and very ancient writings, as I was
told by old men who were alive at that time, perished in that conflagration. And
not content with this wickedness, the impious infidel burned all the other churches
of Ultonia, especially in the regions of Down and Antrim, very few of which have
since been restored. I have been told by my grandfather that he was an eye-witness
of that sacrilegious incendiarism ; and, further, that all the churches previous ti-
that consumption were lightly roofed, and highly adorned with statues and images.
Our natives give him the name of Maol-na-teampull, from his impiety. I have
heard many old men say that they were born in that year ; for so notorious was the
sacrilege of that impious man, that numbers of old men reckoned their age from it
as froma national visitation.” What Father MacCana here says of Lord Cromwell
was previously laid to the charge of Lord Leonard Gray, Lord Deputy in 1538.
It is probable that as the Cromwell family were in this time possessed of the lands,
he supposed that the sacrilege had been committed bytheir ancestor. Lord Leonard
Gray seems to have obtained the name of Maol-na-teampull—the Maol, or bald
man of the churches—from a prophecy attributed to St. Columbkille, which foretells
many evils that were to be perpetrated by ‘‘ Maol, the son of Donn (the brown-
haired man), who shall prove injurious to Leith Cuinn (the North of Ireland), the
seat of literature.” Thus perished that great abbey, the priors of which were
peers of Ireland, and possessed of a third of the landsof Lecale. Its venera-
ble ruins were repaired, and formed .into the present Protestant Cathedral in the
year 1790. Harris thus describes its ruins in 1740 :— ‘‘ The roof was supported by
five handsome arches, and compose a central aisle of twenty-six feet broad, and two
lateral aisles of thirteen feet wide each, and the whole structure is one hundred
fect long. The heads of the pillars and arches, the tops of the windows, and many
niches in the walls were adorned with a variety of sculpture in stone, some parts of
which yet remain. Over the east window, which is very lofty and august, are
three handsome ancient niches, in which the pedestals still continue, whereon it is
supposed the statues of St. Patrick, St. Brigid, and St. Columba formerly stood.”
Harris gives a copy of an illegible inscription which was on a stone over the east
window on the inside. He also says that there was found in the ruins an “ Agnus
Dei, or figure of a lamb, cut in freestone, as big as life, in sculpture not very bad.”
There is built into the western gable on the inside a stone on which is carved the
figure of a bishop holding in his hand one of the short Irish croziers. A portable
altar stone of the thirteenth century was found in the graveyard. Occasionally
stone-lined graves are found, such as have heen found at Saul, St. John’s Poiut,
and other ancient churches throughout the diocese.

