--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-165.png ---
County of Cork. 139

Kil Na Marbhan ; or the Church of the Dead; near
Briggoban, or Brigown, in the barony of Clongibbon. This
church was also founded by St. Abban.™

Kingsale ; in the barony of Kerrycurry and Kinallea, is a
corporation town, sending two burgesses to parliament, and is
well known for its excellent harbour and strong fortifications.

Inquisition 31st August, 32nd Queen Elizabeth, finds, that
the Spittal, or Lazar-House in this town, was endowed with
lands to the annual value of 12€a—Chief Rem.

Priory of Regular Canons ; St. Gobban, a disciple of St.
Ailb, was patron of the monastery of Kingsale ;* and in the
sixth century we meet with St. Began of Kinnsaile. St.
Senan lies buried here : he presided over the Church of Cluan,
‘between the mountains Crot and Mairge, in Munster.°

White Friars ; we haye no information about the foundation
of this house ; but Stephen Prene, the prior of it, obtained,
in the year 1350, a quarter of land in Lischan from Robert
Fitz-Richard Balrayne. Part of the ruins of this monastery
still remain in the north end of the town.9 ,

Legan; There was a monastery here, of which John de
Compton was prior in the year 1301.7 We have no other
account of it, but that, at the suppression of religious houses,
the prior of St. John in Waterford was found to be seized of
this priory.

Lucim ; there was a monastery here, of which the only
account we have is, that it was situated near the city of Cork,
and that David de Cogan was patron in the year 1318.

Maur, see Carigiliky.

Middletown ;* a market and borough, pleasantly situated
in the barony of Imokilly. An abbey was founded here
A.D. 1180, by the Fitzgeralds ;* or, according to others, by
the family of Barry ;¥ it was supplied with monks of the
Cistertian order from the abbey of Nenay, or Magio, in the

™ Act. SS. p. $27. ™Id.. p.750. °Id., p. 573. ° War. Mss., vol. 34, p. 108.

AU Smith, vol. 1, p. 227. * King, p. 141. */d., p. 142. * Was called by the Irish
Castre ni chora. “War. Mon. ™ Allemande.

% Middldown ; The Inquisition given in the text thus commences in the copy
of R.I.A.:—Inquisition the Tuesday next after the nativity of the Virgin Mary.
31st Henry vit. finds the abbot was seized of the abbey, dormitory, cloister,
chapter-house, an hall, &c.

Inquisition 3rd May, 1612, finds that Sir John Fitz Emund Gerrald, knight, was,
at his death, seized of this monastery, and of the possessions thereunto belonging,
containing three carucates of land. and of an hundred acres of land in this county,
and Cowleban , one carucatea ; a mill on the River Awnye Corrg.

Inquisition 26th January, 17th Elizabeth, finds that the castle and townland of
Castleredmonde, in this county, was parcel of the possessions of this abbey. At
the suppression of the monasteries, the abbot was seized of this abbey, castle, and
townland, and are now held from the Queen in capite knight's service, and are now
of the annual value besides reprises, of 16s. 6d.—[ Chief Kemem.]

