--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-287.png ---
County of Down. 255

1297. The prior, taking upon him to hold pleas, and the
delivery of felons within his jurisdiction, &c., the sheriff was
commanded to summon the said prior, to show by what warrant
he presumed to exercise powers which belonged only to the
crown.”

1301. Roger was prior.P

1314. Thomas Bright the prior was made bishop of Down.4

1316. Edward Bruce, at the head of his army of Scots, de-
stroyed the abbey."

1327. Thomas Bright, bishop of Down, and late prior of this
abbey, died, and was interred here.®

1353. Richard Calf, the prior, was made bishop of Down,
and dying on 26th of October, 1365, was interred here.‘

1365. Nicholas was prior."

© King, p. 258. Pld. %1d., p. 198. * Pembridge. * War. Bps., p. 200. */d,
“King, p. 259.

Tiberius, Bishop of Down and Connor, repaired and ornamented the Cathedral,
or Abbey Church, and the following document, preserved in an archiepiscopal
registry of Armagh, tells the means which he adopted for that end :—

“ Tiberius by the Grace of God Bishop of Down and Connor, &c.—Know that
we, with the consent of the Prior of Down and of the convent of the same, have
made certain unions for the repairs of the Cathedral Church of Down, which is
gone to ruin in walls and roof, and for the augmentation of Divine worship in the
aforesaid church, as also on account of the venerable relics of the holy persons, St.
Patrick, St. Columba, and St. Brigid, lying in one tomb in that place. ¢ monas-
tery which formerly, from ancient times, was governed by nuns (which same monas-
tery is now destroyed), and the Monastery of John the Baptist, and the Monastery
of St Thomas, proto-martyr, and the Monastery of the Irish, and the Rectory of
the Parish Church of Ardglass, and the Prebend of Ros, and the Prebend of
Ballengallbee (Ballykilbeg), and the Chapel of St. Mary Magdalene, at the just
and laudable petition of Lord Gelasius Magennis, Commendatory of Down, we
have united, annexed, and incorporated all and each of the aforesaid on account of
the foresaid causes, that it is better to endow the Cathedral Church than that each
should goto ruin. Given at Carrickfergus the 20th day of February, A.D. 1512.”

The Gelasius Magennis (spoken of in the bishop's letter) is called in Irish docu-
ments Glasny ; he was Prior of St. John’s in Down, of Saul, of St. Patrick's in
Down, and Abbot of Newry. ‘‘ The Annals of the Four Masters” record his death
in the year 1526. ‘ Glasny, the son of Hugh Magennis, Abbot of Newry and Prior
of Down and Saul, was slain by the sons of Donnell Magennis—namely, by Donnell
Oge and his kinsmen.” The union of the endowments of the smaller houses to
the cathedral was confirmed by the Primate, October 12, 1541, and the instrument
was directed to ‘‘Conosius (Eugenius) Magennis, Commendatory of Down Sede
Vacante.”

A.D. 1538.—The abbey was burned, and the shrine containing the relics of St.
Patrick, St. Brigid, and St. Columbkille was destroyed by Lord Leonard de Grey,
which is said to have been one of the counts in the indictment on which he was
afterwards condemned and beheaded.

A.D. 1539.—The prior of this abbey resigned it to the King upon being allowed
a pension during his life. Father Edmund MacCanna, in his Itinerary, says :—
“<The impicty of an Englishman, whose name was Cromwell, deserves to be
mentioned in this place with abhorrence. This son of earth. and foul spot on
the human race, having been sent to Ireland by Queen Elizabeth in command,
came with an army to the city of Down, and set fire to the noble church and
monastery of St. Patrick, where even the reliques of Saints Patrick, Columba,
and Brigid were exposed to the fury of the flames. And there cannot be a doubt


