--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-310.png ---
274 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

who, in his wars, had demolished the abbey of Erynagh, or
Carrig ; in order to make his peace with Heaven for that
profanation, built an abbey here for monks of the Cistertian
order, and dedicated it, on the 3rd of June, A.D. 1180, to the
Virgin Mary ;¥ he supplied this house with monks from the
abbey of Furness, in Lancashire, and gave to it all the pos-
sessions which had belonged to Erynagh.*

The abbot E——— was a subscribing witness to Sir John
de Courcey’s grant to the church of St. Patrick at Down.*
1237. G——— the abbot was a subscribing witness to

Hugh de Lacie’s charter to the abbey of Newry.>

¥ War. Canob. Cist., p.75. * Mon. Angl., vol. 2, pp. toand 718. */d., p. L020.
» King, p. 93-
the festival of ‘‘ Biteus, #.c. Mobin, abbot of Inis-Cumhscraigh. He was of the
race of Eochaidh, son of Muireadhac, who was of the seed of Heremon.”

The festival of St. Biteus, or Mobin, is given again at the 29th of August. It
seems surprising that there could have been any mistake regarding the ancient
name of Inch, for the O'Clerys, in the Table.or Index of the Martyrology, having
given David as another form of the name Mobin,say—‘‘ St. David of Iniscuscraidh,
and this island is situate beside Dun-da-lethglas” (Downpatrick). There are
several saints named Mobin, but Mobin of Inch seems to have been the Mobin,
who was a companion and disciple of St. Finian. The Annals written by
Tighernach, abbot of Clonmacnoise, who died in the year 1088, nearly 90 years
before De Courcy’s invasion, records at the year 1002, ‘‘ Sitric, King of the Danes,
arrived with a fleet in Uladh (Down), and plundered Kilclief and Iniscuscraidh.”
The Four Masters add that he ‘‘carried off many prisoners from both.” The
same annals record. at the year 1161, the death of ‘‘Ogan O’Cormacain, erenagh
of Iniscuscraidh,” and at 1149, they inform us that a party belonging to an army
led by Niall O'Loughlin, “ went upon the islands of Lough Cuan (Strangford
Lough), and they plundered Iniscumscraidh and several other churches.” The
Charter of Maurice MacLoughlin to the Abbey of Newry, about the year 1153, is
witnessed among others by ‘‘Aedha Maglanha, erenanus de Insecumscray.”
The name Maglanha is still common in the neighbourhood of Inch, under the form
Maglennon.

The more ancient church was situaved in the middle of the cemetery. The sim-
plicity of its form and architectural features indicated a very early antiquity ; over
the south door was a piece of ancient sculpture representing the Saviour on the cross,
and a person on his knees, with his hands elevated prayingto him. The old abbey
church seems to have been eclipsed, and to have become a chapel to the Anglo-
Norman abbey ; it is valued in the Taxation of Pope Nicholas, under the name of
“ The Chapel of Ines,” at 1 mark. This venerable edifice, which Dane and
Norman spared, has been barbarously swept away to make room for a tomb for
the Maxwell family, of Finnabrogue. In any other country such a monument
would have been under the immediate protection of its government.

We have already given the history of the foundation of the Cistercian Abbey of
Inch (see Erynagh), and we need here only repeat that Sir John de Courcy
founded this abbey as an amends for demolishing the Benedictine Abbey of
Erenagh, which is said to have been converted by the native princes into a strong
military post. The registry of Furness Abbey, from which its monks were brought,
assigns the 30th of May, in the year 1180, as the date of its foundation.

** Anno mileno centeno bis quadrageno
Curcy fundavit Ynes, hostes hinc superavit.”

Grace and Pembridge state that it was built in the year 1187. The new abbey,
as might be expected, was thoroughly anti-Irish, so much so, that it was one of
the two monasteries complained of in the Quzrimonia, which Donald O'Neill
and the other Irish chiefs addressed to the Pope in the year 1318. His words are—

