--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-255.png ---
County of Down. 223

613. The abbot Fintan M‘Intrew died about this time, and
the town was destroyed by: fire! St. Columb was abbot, and
probably about the beginning of the century ; his feast is
held on the 1st of October.

634. Died the abbot St. Forannan; the 12th of June is
appointed for his feast."

645. The abbot M‘Laisre died May the 16th, on which day
his feast is held.°

1MGeogh, ™ Fleming, sup. ” Calendar, ° Act. SS., p. 792.

branches extended through Ireland and Scotland. that these times appear to have
been expressly foreshadowed in the verses of David— Thou hast visited the earth,
and hast plentifully watered it,’ &c. Nor was it only into the countries I have
mentioned, but even into distant lands, that crowds of saints, like an inundation,
poured, one of whom, St. Columbanus, penetrating into these our regions of
Gaul, built the monastery of Luxieu, and there became a great multitude. So
great do they say it was, that the solemnization of the Divine offices was kept up
by companies, who relieved each other in succession, so that not one moment,
day or night, was there an intermission of their devotions.” Seven years after he
founded Bangor. St. Comgall visited Scotland, where he founded a church in the
island of Tiree, and assisted his friend St. Columba in the conversion of Budeus,
King of the Northern Picts. Having returned to his dear Bangor, he died on the
toth of May, A.D. 601, in the gist year of his age, after having received the
Holy Viaticum from St. Fiacre. abbot of Conwall, in the county of Donegal, and
afterwards of Clonard. Long after the death of the holy man, the same St.
Fiacre came to Bangor, and, having opened the original tomb, transferred to a
costly shrine the body of St. Comgall, and took for himself an arm, which he
carried home to Leinster as a priceless relic. The shrine, which the piety of the
community had adomed with gold and precious stones, attracted the cupiiity of
the Danes, and the Annals of the Four Masters record :—

A.D. 822. “ The plundering of Bangor by the foreigners ; the oratory was
broken, and the relics of Comgall were taken from the shrine in which they were,
as Comgall himself has foretold when he said :—

«It will be true, true, by the will of the Supreme King of kings,
My bones shall be brought, without defect, from the beloved Bangor to
Antrim.’”

The crozier of St. Comgall was preserved by the clergy of Armagh till it was
taken from them by the English. St. Comgall is said to have drawn up, for the
direction of his monks, a rule which was reckoned among the principal rules in
Ireland. It is a metrical composition in Irish, consisting of thirty-six quatrains.
Though some have doubted whether or not it be the composition of Comgall, the
style and composition establish its claims to antiquity. We have, however, an
undoubted portion of his writings preserved in the works of his disciple St.
Columbanus, which, short though it be, indicates the means and the principles by
which the founder of Bangor raised it to the first position among the monasteries
of the island. His words are—‘‘ Ifthe cultivator of the land and husbandman,
when preparing the soil to commit to it the seed, does not consider his work
all done when he has broken up the earth with a strong share, and by the action
of the plough has reduced the stubborn soil, but further endeavours to cleanse the
ground of unfruitful weeds. to clear it of injurious rubbish,to pluck up by the roots
the spreading shoots of thorns and brambles, fully persuaded that his land will
never produce a good crop, unless it be reclaimed from mischievous plants, apply-
ing to himself the words of the prophet ‘break up your fallow ground, and sow
not among thorns,’ how much more does it behove us, who believe the hope of our
fruits to be laid up, not on earth but in heaven, to cleanse from vicious passions
the field of our heart, and not suppose we have done enough, when we subdue
the ground of our bodies by the labour of fasting and of watching, unless we
primarily study to correct our vices and reform our morals.” Obedience and

