--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-266.png ---
Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

‘n, Ballefredon, Ballememan, Ballow, Balle-

234 -ach, Ballema-connell, Ballecrohan, Balle-
Carriostanclac-canduffe, Callos-

reigh, Ballemowne, Carogh,
Ballencarndeogh, Ballen-
, Ballecrotte, Bal-
lemajor, with all

Bangor, Balleport
vullecraghe, Ballecor:
hum, Ballenoghne, Ballo:
nescron, Carronnser, Carrow
Raiogele, Ballefebane, Ballenba

celloe, Ballenmulle, Ballesallogt of God: and embraced
leschalle, Ballemegh, Ballemachcit never attained its

to his heavenly

im. P. 303) one

at Armagh on .

afflicted with epilepsy, acknowledged the ch:
the monastic state under St. Malachy.

r revived, to some degree, under St. } the title of
Primitive splendour. Its great benefactor, St. M: belonged
reward, A.D. 1148. During his lifetime we find %

Maurice O’Henectaigh, styled successor of St. ComgaNe son of
the 13th of October, 1131. He may have been a persortion to
Cowarb, held, in those days of confusion, the lands which 11, The

@ the monastery.

A.D. 1149. We are told by the Four Masters that an ar.¥
Niall O’Loughlin into Ulidia to settle some disputes regardin, *
the throne of that Principality, plundered Bangor and many other",
same annals, in the last entry which they make regarding Bangor,
the death of Maelisa O’Corerain, successor of Cot I.

It appears that the community of Bangor advanced pretensions to the
electing the bishops of Down, and of having their abbey considered the ca.
but the primate decided against them, and Pope Innocent, about the year
issued a bull, the text of which has been lately published by Theiner, declarin,
church of Down the Cathedral, and the prior and chapter of the Order of
Benedict belonging to that church the electors.

About the year 1291, Pope Nicholas IV., having imposed on the clergy of In
land a tax of one-tenth of their movables and annual income for the relief of th
Holy Land, the church of Bangor was valued at 28 marks (a mark 135. 4d), and the
temporalities of the abbot at 58 shillings and 1 penny. The poverty of the great
abbey and the church seems strange ; but we are to bear in mind that most people,
if they can prevent it, do not wish to have their Property valued at its full value,
when the valuation is for the purposes of taxation, and in estimating the poverty of
Bangor in its fallen State, we must take into account the value ot money at that
date. In one of the Pipe rolls preserved in the Irish Exchequer Record Office, of
the date of 1261, we find the fol lowing entry, which shows the value of money at
the time :— John Byset (he would now be called M'Keown) 7 cows, the price of
each cow being forty pence, for making a distress.” In ‘A Brief Description of
Ireland, made in this year, 1589, by Robert Payne,” we find that at that compara-
tively modern period “ A barrell of wheate, or a barrell of bay salt, containing
three bushels and a half of Winchester measure, is sold there for 4s. malt, peason,
beanes, for 2s. 87. ; barley for 2s. 4d.; oates for 20d.; a fresh sammon, worth in
London tos., for 6d. ; 24 herrings, or 6 makerels, 6 sea breames, a fat hen, 30 eggs,
a fat pigge, one pound of butter, or 2 gallons of new milk, fora penny; a reede
deare, without the skinne, for 25. 6d.; a fat beefe for 138. 4d.; a fat mutton for
18d, One hundred pounds will buy 60 milche kine, 300 yeawes, 20 swine, and a
good teame; the ground to keepe these cattle and use this teame on will be 400
acres, at £10 rent.” Hitherto I have recorded the glories of Bangor; it now be-
comes my sad duty to chronicle its decay. An enactment of the Anglo-Irish Par-
liament, held in Kilkenny, A.D. 1367, declared that no mere Irishman should be
allowed to make his profession in a religious house situated amongst the English.
This enactment extended to the abbey of Bangor, and after that the race to which
Comgall, Collumbanus, and Gall belonged, was to be excluded from the cloisters
they had sanctified, and the rich endowments which the piety of the Irish had
consecrated to religion were given to foreigners. Religious discontent among the
People was thus added to the other evils of the land, and the effect was such as
might be expected. The successor of St. Comgall now presents himself in a new


