--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-199.png ---
County of Derry. 173

A.D. 1100. O’Cahane, Prince of the country, founded a
priory here for canons regular following the rule of St.
Angustin.”

1206. Died the prior O’Lathvertagh*

1215. Died the prior Paul O’Murey.t

1253. Died the prior Moyle Peter O’Murray."

1397. On the 16th October the archbishop of Armagh, at
the intreaty of the prior and convent, solemnly restored the
church and cemetery of this place, which had been polluted
by the effusion of Christian blood.'® Dungiven was the vil-
lage of Dermit O’Cahane.”

Magillagan »* At the outlet of Loughfoyle, in the barony
of Kenoght, five miles north of Newtown Limavaddy.

St. Columb, the great founder of churches, erected a monas-
tery at Ardia, which is also called Aird-megiollagain ; this
abbey was called the shrine of St. Columb," and in process of

* Allemande. * Annal. Munst. ‘War. Mon. % Annal. Ulton. © War. Mss.
vol. 34.

old church are situated a little outside of the village in the townland Dungiven.
They consist of a nave and chancel, which communicate by a lofty circular chancel-
arch. The nave measured forty feet by twenty. A round tower, about fifty feet in
height, stood at the S. W. corner, incorporated with the walls of the church: it was
undermined by some persons seeking for treasure, and fell to the ground in the year
1784. Drawings of the old church and round tower may be seen in Sampson’s
‘* Memoir of the Chart and Survey of Londonderry,” p. 328. In the Martyrology
of Donegal, at the 8th of January, we find the following entry : ‘‘ St. Neachtan of
Dungiven, in Cianacht of Glengiven, A.D. 678.” The death of Neachtan Neir is
recorded in the Annals of Ulster in A.D. 678; in the Annals of the Four Masters,
in A.D. 677.—See Reeves’ ** Cotton’s Vis.,” p. 41.

13 Archdall makes this statement on the authority of Ware, who derived it from
the Acts of Archbishop Cotton’s Visitation. This important record is itself now
accessible to every one, having been published in full by Dr. Reeves for the I. A.
Society in 1850. We are not told, however, when or by whom the wicked deed
was perpetrated which brought desecration on the church and cemetery of Dun-
given. It was probably something similar to that recorded in the Annals of
Ulster at A.D. 1121, when the cemetery of Banagher, about three miles from Dun-
given, was thus desecrated : “ Gilla-espoig-Eoghain O’Hennesy, king of Kianaghta,
was killed by his kinsmen in the middle of the cemetery of Banagher.”

“The parish originally called Zamdlaght-ard, became known in later times as
Ard-Mac_ Gillygen, from the family of the Magilligan’s, who were the hereditary
tenants of its church-lands. The Magilligan’s, according to M‘Firbis, were des-
cended from Oilioll, son of Foghan Breadach, and their church-lands, in 1615, con-
sisted of forty towns or balliboes, ‘‘ which forty balliboes or towns do contain ten
quarters, amounting to two-and-a-half ballibetaghs.”—(U/ster Znguis), The ruins
of the old church are in the townland of Tamlaght. Its patron saint was Cadan
or Catanus, ‘‘ whose tomb, nearly covered by the surrounding graves, lies close
under the east gable of the old church.” —Recves, page 84. In the Book of Leacan
this saint is called ‘‘ The Priest Cadan of Tamlaght-ard.” In the Tripartite Life
of St. Patrick, he is styled “ Catanus Presbyter,” and is named as one of the
household of our Apostle.— 7rias Traum, page 167. It was probably the similarity
of the name that led the able writers of the Ordnance Survey to mark this spot and
the neighbouring well, as ‘‘ Bishop Aedan’s tomb, and Bishop Aedan’s well.”

Hence the name Ballynascrine, or more correctly, Ballynascrine de Ardo.
The ruins of the old church of Ballenascrine, stand in the cemetery, on the north
side of the Moyola, in Moneyconey, which was one of ‘‘ the six towns of Ballyna-

