--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-071.png ---
The County Armagh. St

was abbot of Cluainefiacul, that is, the church of the Tooth,
so named from a tooth of St. Patrick which was said to have
been preserved here. St. Lugud was a very aged man in the
year 5809

Clonfeakle is now a parish church, about five miles from
Armagh.”

Kilmore. St. Mochtee, who afterwards built Louth, founded
Kilmoreaedhain, in the territory of Huadmeth ; the church is
dedicated to St. Aedan.*

Kilmore is now a parish church, three miles east of Ar-
magh.>

Kilslere. \Wadding, the Franciscan, calls this Killare, and
says it was the principal monastery belonging to the third
order of Franciscans in Ireland. Thomas Ornay, was made
perpetual commissary of it in the year 1457.°

Killevy. At the foot of the mountain of Slieu Gullen,® in
the barony of Orior.

St. Darerca,“ otherwise called Monenna, sister to St. Patrick,
was abbess of Kilsleve, or Belsleibhe; she died A.D. 517, or
518, and her ‘feast is held on the 6th of July. Others say,

17r. Th. p.8. Act. SS. p. 453. Usher, p. 496. *Liber visit. * Act. SS. p.
731. Lid. visit. © Allemande. * Usher, p. 526, Act. SS. p. 190, 606, 718.

at 1003, record the death of “ Eochaidh da Flannagain, airchinneach of the Lis-
aeidheadh of Ardmacha, and of Cluan-Fiachna, the most distinguished historian of
the Irish.” And at 1069, the death of Aedh, son of Dubhghall, vice-abbot of
Cluan-Fiachna. It is also mentioned at 1252. The ancient parish church stood
in the townland of Tullydowey, in a curve of the river Blackwater, on the
Tyrone side.

This mountain took its name from Cuilean, an artificer, who lived in the
reign of Conchobbar Mac Nessa, King of Ulster, and by whom the celebrated
Cuchellain was fostered.

4 Colgan, in his ‘‘ Life of St. Darerca” (22nd March), remarks tbat Ussher (De
Primordiis Ecclesiar. Britannar, p. 705-6), confounds the St. Darerca who was St.
Patrick's sister, with St. Darerca, otherwise St. Moninna, abbess of Kilsleve. The
former is honoured on the 22nd March, the latter on the 6th of July. St. Mon
inna, according to the ancient Life, written by Conchubhranus, and used by
Ussher, founded seven churches in Scotland: one called Chilnecase,in Galloway ;
another on the summit of the mountain of Dundenenal, in Landonia ; the third on
the mountains of Dunbreten; the fourth at the Castle of Strivelin ; the fifth at
Dun-Eden, now Edinburgh ; the sixth on the mountain of Dun-Pelder ; and the
seventh at Lanfortin, near Dundee, where she died. The ruins of the church at
Killevy are still visible. The ‘Four Masters” have the following entries regard-
ing this establishment : In A.D. 654 “ Coincenn, of Cill-Sleibhthe, died.” A.D.
921, *Dinbhleter, of Cill-Sleibhthe, priest of Ard-Macha was martyred by the
foreigners of Snamh-Aighneach” (now Carlingford Lough). “A.D. 1029, Donn-
Chadh Na Donnegain, Lord of Feammhagh ; and Cinaedh, son of Angeirrce, Lord
of Cenailli, mutually fell by each other at Cill-Sleibhe.” ‘‘ A.D. 1146, a great
wind-storm occurred on the 3rd day of December, which caused a great destruction
of woods throughout Ireland ; it prostrated sixty trees at Doire-Choluim-Chille, and
killed and smothered many persons in the Church : it also killed other people at
Cill-Sleibhe.” ‘‘ A.D. 1150, Cailleach. of Cill-Sleibhe, a pious good senior died,
after good penance, at an advanced age.”

