--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-198.png ---
172 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

the river Bann, in the barony of Coleraine, and diocess of
Derry."

Domnachdolda, or Domnachmor ; A church built near the
Faughan water, in the barony of Tirekerin ; Bescna, a disciple
of St. Patrick, and also his brewer, was a presbyter of this
house.°

Donoghmore is now a parish church.P

Dunbo * St. Patrick founded Duncruthen for St. Beoan, or
Beoad ; it appears to be the same which is now called Dunbo
and is situated on the Atlantic ocean, in the territory of Mac-
hare, and barony of Coleraine.?

Dungiven;" A village in the barony of Kenoght, 13 miles
south east of Derry.

® Visitation Book. ° Tr. Th., p. 181. ” Visitation Book. Tr. Th., p. 181.

© The church of DomhAnach-dola, sometimes written Domhnach-dula, is supposed
to have been near the Moyola, _In the Tripartite Life of St. Patrick, we find St.
Beschna mentioned as his disciple and chaplain: ‘* Sanctus Beschna presbyter
de Domhnach-dola, sacellanus.”—( 7rias., page 167). An ancient poem, on St.
Patrick’s household, inserted in the Annals of the Four Masters, and also preserved
in the Book of Lecan, fol. 44, also mentions St. Beschna; ‘ The priest, Beschna,
sweet his verses, the chaplain of the son of Alprann (é.¢., St. Patrick).” Archdall
seems to have confounded St. Beschna with St. Mescan, who, in the poem just
cited, is styled: ‘‘The priest, Mescan, without evil, his friend and his brewer.
(Annals of F. Masters, i., 137). The Tripartite Life also describes him as ‘Sanctus
Meschanus de Domhnach juxta Fochmuine fluvium, cervicarius.”— 77ias, page
167. The church of Domhnach-Mescain seems to be that described in Archdall’s
text : it was situated near the river Faughan, in the county Derry. Domnachdulan
on the contrary, was in the plain of Magh-dula, through which the river Moyola
flows.—See Notes of O’Donovan, Four Afasters, i., 137. An interesting account
of the members of St. Patrick’s household may be seen in the new ‘‘ Life of St.
Patrick,” just published, by M. F. C. Cusack.

4 According to Colgan, 7rias Thaum., page 495, St. Adamnan was the patron
of Dunbo. The ruins of the old church, situate near Downhill, measure sixty-three
feet by twenty-seven and a-half. In this parish was situate the ancient fortification
of Dun Ceithirn, so called from Cethern, son of Fintan, one of the famous heroes
of the Red Branch, who flourished in Ulster in the beginning of the Christian
Era. The late Mr. O’Donovan was the first to identify this fortress with the hill
now known as the ‘‘ Giant's Sconce.” He thus writes in the ‘‘ Londonderry Let-
ters.” Ordnance Survey, page 60: ‘I visited the Giant's Sconce, and viewed it
with religious contemplation. I am perfectly satisfied that it is the Afunitio
Cethirni of Adamnan, and the Dun Ccithirn of Tigernach, and other annalists.””
Archdall errs when he confounds this place with the Dun Cruithne, or ‘ Arx
Cruthaenorum,” of which Colgan speaks, and where St. Beoaidh was placed as
bishop by our apostle, The townland of Duncrun still retains traces of the name
Dun Cruithne, and within its limits, not far from the modern parish church of
Magilligan, on the top of a hill commonly called ‘‘ Canon’s brae,” may still be
seen ‘‘ the foundations of a small building, thirty-five feet by nineteen, inside which
lies a long rude stone, having on it the figure of a cross in relievo. The cemetery
has not been used for many years, and has been partly tilled. A ditch, which has
been drawn across the hill, divides the sites of cemetery and the church. The
spot, however, can always be identified, for it is marked on the Ordnance Survey,

uins of an Abbey.” —(Reeves’ ‘‘ Cotton's Visitation, page 84.)

12 Dungiven (Dun Geimhin) and Glengiven have been Latinized Munitio pellium
and vallis pellium, and, by a curious coincidence, both places, at the time of the
Ulster plantation, fell to the lot of the ‘‘Skinner’s Company.” The ruins of the

