--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-238.png ---
206 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

Oughteran, the last warden, surrendered the friary,
and was found seized of the three quarters of Kilcrean, Kil-
macowle and Killodonnell; annual value, besides reprises, 3s.*

Inquisition 6th November, first King James, finds, that the
warden of this friary was seized of three quarters of land,
called Kilcrean, Kilmacowle and Kil O’Donnell ; annual value,
besides reprises 35.

8 Loughdearg ,' in the parish of Templecarn, and barony of
Tirhugh ; in this Lough there are several islands, the largest
is called the island of St. Dabeoc, some call it St. Fintan’s
island, and others the island of Saints.™ In this island was a
priory of canons regular following the rule of St. Augustin,
which was dedicated to the Saints Peter and Paul," and
founded, as some say, by the great apostle of Ireland, but
others give the foundation to St. Daboec,° who was also called
Mobeoc and Beonan; he was brother to St. Canoc, who
flourished about the year 492. St. Dabeoc is patron of this
church, where three festivals are held to his honour yearly, on

* Chief Rememb. ** Id. 1 Or the Red Lake, and said to have been called formerly

Finlough, or, the White Lake. ™ Richardson's Folly of Pilgrimages. ™ War. Mon.
° Annal. Munst.
From this we are to infer that it was largely endowed by the Tower family, and in
gratitude was called after them. O’Donovan adds, in the same note, that the abbey
was the present Killymard in the barony of Raphoe and countv of Donegal. This,
however, he subsequently acknowledges to be an error into which he had fallen
inadvertantly, and says it is really situated close to Fort Stewart, near the upper
end of Lough Swilly, in the barony of Kilmacrenan. The ruin is there to be seen,
and is regarded by competent judges as the purest specimen of early ecclesiastical
architecture to be found among the numerous old abbeys of Ireland. A large por-
tion of the side walls of the chapel still remain, and a turret or gable, pierced
with a splendid and well-preserved gothic window. The general impression among
the best authorities on such matters is, that it was built in the sixteenth century by
an O'Donnell, as a chapel of ease to the ecclesiastical establishment of Kilmacrenan.
There is a very pretty legend among the people here about the bell of the abbey.
The story goes that a party of marauders from Tyrone attacked the abbey, and
carrying off,amongst other things, the bell, put it on board a vessel which they had
waiting off the shore below, and departed with their booty across the lough. But
God’s justice overtook them, for a storm arose, and the sacrilegious robbers were
all drowned, and thus the sacred bell never entered Tyrone. It is kept somewhere
at the bottom of the lough, whence its muffled tones proceed once every seven years
at the still hour of midnight.

18 Lough Dearg.—This is commonly known by the name of “St. Patrick's Par-

tory,” and why it is so will appear from a very interesting account, given in a

ttle work intituled ‘‘ Mirror of Penance,” and published in Louvain about the
middle of the 17th century. It is as follows :—“ St. Patrick entered a cave in the
island of Lough Dearg in order to pray more fervently to God, being removed
from all the abstractions of the external world in that gloomy Derc, and while his
mind was earnestly directed to the Divinity, he prayed that the pains of Purgatory
might be shown unto him. His request was granted, and lo! before his heaven-
touched fancy the region of Purgatory sprang into existence, and he saw the souls
of millions undergoing the process of purification, each placed in such a crucible
as was fitted to soften and remove the terrestrial dross that stained the etherial
essence of the spirit ; some marked with a deep hue, which much destroyed their
heavenly radiance, but which blackened them not wholly; others half-dimmed,
half-bright, and in the rapid progress of becoming spirits of light from the action

ey eg eee

