--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-181.png ---
County of Cork. 155

1603.—7 Nov. The wardenship of the College, or Chauntry, of Yoghall,
with all the lands, tenements, and hereditaments to the same belonging, and the
advowson and patronage of said wardenship, called The Wardenship of Our
Ladye’s College of Yoghall, being the estate of Gerald, late Earl of Desmond
attainted, were granted to James Fullerton, gent., rent 3s. 4d. Irish.—{Calendar of
Patent Rolls, 1 Jac. I., part 2, p. 8.]

1604.—31 March. By an Inquisition, taken this day at Cork, it was found
that Sir Walter Raleigh, fately attainted of high treason, was possessed (among
others), for a term of 45 years yet to come or thereabouts, of the New College
of the B. V. Mary of Youghall, and of all its buildings, edifices, orchards,
fruiteries, gardens, impropriate rectories, vicarages, churches, tithes, glebes, etc.,
rendering therefor to the warden £13 6s. 8d. yearly.

1604.—3 April. Grant to Sir George Carew, Knt. In Yoghall town. Two
messuages and gardens, and all the lands and hereditaments, spiritual and
temporal, of the New College of the B. V. Mary of Yoghall, rent 2s.; with the
advowsons, presentations, etc., of the wardenship, and all churches, rectories,
vicarages and chapels of all other benefices belonging to said wardenship, rent
38. 42 3 parcel of the estate of Gerald, Earl of Desmond, attainted : demised
in fee farm to Sir James Fullerton, Knt., 7 Nov. 1603, at a rent of 4s.

This patronage he sold to Sir Richard Boyle, who obtained a new patent.

1604.—10 May. In Sir Richard Boyle’s patent of this date, is the acknowledg-
ment that Sir Walter Raleigh, at the time of his attainder, was lawfully possessed
for the term unexpired of the lease, by mesne conveyance from Sir Thomas Norris,
of all the hereditaments, spiritual and temporal, of the New College of the B. V.
Mary of Yoghall, as granted to said Norris for 60 years by the warden and fellows,
28 Sept. 1588: which interest, as conveyed to the said Boyle, 7 Dec. 1602, the
King now ratifies and confirms.

1609-10.—8 March.—Grant to Donagh, Earl of Thomond. The College, or
tenement within the walls of Yoghall, called The New College of the B. V. Mary
of Yoghall, with all its hereditaments.—[{Calendar of Pat. Rolls, p. 159.]

1609-10.—23 March.—Grant to Sir Richard Boyle. The advowson, patronage,
and presentation of the wardenship of the New College of clerks of the Church of
the E V. Mary of Yoghall, and of all the churches, rectories, vicarages and chapels,
and the nomination of the several curates, and all other spiritual benefits to the
said wardenship belonging. The patent now granted recites previous patents,
bearing date 29 Nov. 1603 and 10 May 1504, respectively, and confirms them.

1641. The Earl of Cork. being ordered by the Lord Deputy of Munster to
mantain Youghal in person, against the troops of the Confederation, took up his
residence at the College, which he strongly fortified. He also built five circular
turrets at the angles of the park, and raised platforms of earth on which he placed
ordnance to command the town and harbour. Several interesting letters, written
by him from the beleagured town. are printed with the State Letters of his son Lord
Orrery ; and his Diary, full of minute records of passing events is preserved, it is
understood, at Lismore, Here he closed his eventful career, dying within the walls
of the College, 15 Sept. 1643.

Saint John's House of Benedictines, Youghal—1360.—Saint John's House,
situated in the Main or High-street of Youghal, was founded at this period. It
was a dependency of the wealthy Benedictine Priory of St. John the Evangelist,
at Waterford, established in that city in 1185 by John, Earl of Morton.

1366.—The Escheator accounts for 16s. 8d. of the rents and issues of a mes-
suage with its appurtenances, in the town of Yoghill, co. Cork, now in the King’s
hands, because the Prior of St. John’s, near Waterford, had acquired it contrary
to the statute of mortmain, and granted it to Walter Kenneford and Isolda Hore.
(Escheator’s Roll, 39 to 41 Edw. III.]

1590.—31 Aug. It was found, that a messuage in the town of Yoghall county
of Cork, commonly called St. John’s House, of the annual value of 8¢., was

arcel of the possessions of the Priory of St. John the Evangelist, near Waterford.
EChier Remembrancer. ]

Of this Chapel, the chief remains are the gables and South side-wall. The
East end, through which was the entrance, is to the street, and still retains its
pointed doorway with its moulded jambs and ornamented spandrils.

