--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-095.png ---
County of Clare. 75

the son of Doncha, son of Brien-roe, at the head of a powerful
army of Irish and English, entered the town, and did burn
and destroy every house in it.’

1311. About this time Donogh, King of Thomond, be-
stowed the entire revenues of his principality towards the
support of the poor friars of this monastery, and for enlarging
and beautifying their house.*

1313. Dermot O’Brien, prince of Thomond, was buried in
this monastery in the habit of a Franciscan Friar.*

1343. Moriertach O’Brien, the son of Theodoric, prince of
Thomond, died June the 5th, and was buried here; and the
same year Matthew M‘Comara, called the Blind, who built
the refectory and sacristy of the monastery, was buried here
in the habit of the order.°

1350. Pope Clement VI. granted several indulgences to this
monastery ;? and Theodoric, the son of Donogh O’Brien, was
interred therein?

1364. Dermot O’Brien, late prince of Thomond, died on
the vigil of the Conversion of St. Paul, at Ardrachan, in
the county of Galway, but he had his sepulture in this
monastery.‘

1370. Matthew O’Brien, prince of Thomond, dying on the
feast of St. Philip and St. James, was also interred here.

1375. This year King Edward III., moved with compassion
for the poverty of this house, and the scarcity of provisions in
this part of the country, granted a licence, dated at Limerick,
August the 22nd, to the guardian and friars, to enter into the
English pale, and purchase provisiohs of every kind.» And
he also granted a licence to Marian Currydany, a brother of
the house to go to the city of Argentine, in Almania, and
there-to study in the schools.!

This friary was reformed by the Franciscans of the strict
observance.*

In a rental of the crown, in the year 1577, in the office of
the auditor general, the crown was then in possession of the
site of this monastery, a mill on the river Fergus, an eel and
salmon weir, with some houses and gardens in the village.

On the Ist of June, 1621, it was granted to William
Donegan, Esq.!

Many of the ancient ornaments of this building still remain,
this with other similar instances must argue the refined taste
of our ancestors. It is now the parish church.®

yAnnal Inisfal, *Collect. vol. 1. p. 614. *Ann. Inisfal. Ann. Nenaght. King,
. 316. “Ud. *Allemande. °King ut sup. Ud. *King ut sup. “Harris Coll. vol. 3.
‘King, p.139. “War. Mss. vol. 34, p. 159. Rolls.
K me Protestant Church of the parish is erected in the nave of the old Franciscan
‘y:

