--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-064.png ---
46 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

Cloghnancorragh, Grangeaghmore; grange of Corturobe,
Kilmachugh, Mullaghtuirbeg; grange of Cloghan, Knocka-
carney, Tyrarly, Taghaboy, Cloghancorragh; grange of
Tyrarly, Dromawell, Cloghcorragh, Aghteeconchor, Dromcogh,
Dromdoiffe, Mullaghnecrewrocderge; grange of Aghinegoo-
ran, Lurgeshankill, Merimichael, Luggemonyn, Knocknegap-
pull, Lisbarran; grange of Tullyfaran, Grangeoghmore and
Grange, Knockmeevy, Drumnckunshen, Altooglass, Dromagh-
emeclee, Coolonan, Lissedawell, Tullybronyduffe; grange of
Croscreen, Tully Ivinmar, Greanmore and Grange, Tannagh-
nemingell, Knockelough, Knockelough, Knockneinlough,
Tannaghgarve, Boleregh, Corcleagh and the Grange, Litter-
loane, Knockneglibeg, Amisnegananagh, Drumnott, Teve-
doone, Conjeitragh, Kilnagospagh, Leaghteedawly, Cavan,
Amnineganagh in the Fews, Monemore, Garvaghymore, Alte-
neynan, Cavangroagh.

The abbot was also seized of all the tithes growing and
accruing from the said lands, and Sessiogh, Lurgaboy, Bally-
vanran, and Knoetanty in Clanchoncy. He was also seized
of the lands of Dromarge, alias Dooghmuinterdogan, Cool-
cummery, Jengooda, Tinenesken, Balliboe, Cavan, Tullyasnech,
Tiretragh, Tirenesagart, and Down."

By an inquisition taken the first year of King James, 1603,
it appears that the abbot was also scized of a third part of a
quarter of land near Newton, in the county of Tyrone,
called the Grange, containing a ploughland of the yearly value
of one shilling; that he was also seized of a carrucate of land
at the Curragh, by the rent of twelve pence yearly, payable to
the heirs of Theobald de Verdon, to wit, to Thomas Furneval,
who married Joan, the daughter of the said Theobald.”

This abbey, and all the possessions thereunto belonging,
were granted, in May, 1612, to Sir Toby Caulfield, Knight, at
the rent of five pounds Irish.*

Priory of the Culdei.® The Culdei, or Colidei, were secular

"King, p. 252. “1d. p. 333. *Lodye, vol. 3. p. 86. 1.

The word Culdaeus, whence the English Cu/dee, was first used by Hector
Boece, as an equivalent for the Irish word Célé-De, which is composed of Célé—
friend, servant—and De, the genitive of Dia, God. It represents the Latin expres-
sion servus Dei, which was in general use to designate a person who followed the
monastic life. According to Dr. Reeves it was not a distinctive name borne
uniformly by any one order, but was a term of various application borne both by
tegulars and by seculars. There were establishments of Culdces at Clonmacnoise,
Clondalkin, Monahincha, Devenish, Clones, Pubble, and Scattery. The Culdees

assed from Ireland into Scotland, then into York, and to the Isle of Bardsey in
Wales. At Armagh they served in the cathedral at the choir and_altar, until the
introduction of the canons regular in 1126 diminished their influence and import-
ance. It was at that date that their prior became precentor in the cathedral. He

