--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-215.png ---
County of Donegall. 187

1505.0 Menelaus M‘Carmacan, the bishop of Raphoe, died in
the habit of a Franciscan on the 9th of May, 1515, and was
buried in this monastery’. Roderic O’Donnell, bishop of
Derry, died in the same habit, on the 8th October, 1550 or 1551,
and was interred here.1 There was in this house a well-chosen
library.”

At a small distance from the town, the remains of this
monastery may be seen. The cloister consists of small arches,

° War. Ms., vol. 34. ? War. Bps., p. 274. %1d., p. 291. * War. Mon.

gained. But he was suddenly stopped in his career of triumph. English gold
and not English valour paralyzed the smashing might of this gallant young
chieftain. Dowcra, the English general, was established with a powerful force in
Derry, and Red Hugh had arrived before the city to dislodge him, when he was
suddenly summoned away to crush the English armies in Connaught. He left
his brother-in-law, the active Nial Garv, to watch Dowcra, and taking with him a
division of the army, marched into Connaught, purposing to return as soon as he
accomplished his mission thcre. But he was sadly disappointed. He had not
been long absent when his base-souled kinsman, ial, betrayed him for a bribe,
which he accepted from Dowcra. To consummate his traitorous defection, Nial
actually put himself at the head of the English troops, marched to Lifford, where,
having occupied O’Donnell’s castle, he proceeded to Donegall, seized the monastery
and threw up fortfications around it. The friars fled. The sad intelligence
reached Red Hugh in Connaught. Swearing vengeance against the false Nial he
hastened to Donegall and laid siege to the monastery. Nial was brave, and re-
sisted with stubborn courage. On the night of the 19th September a fire broke
out in the building. Hugh Roe seized the occasion for an assault. The men on
both sides fought like lions. All through that night did the fierce struggle last,
the conflagration adding a ghastly horror to the wild work of death, till at length,
in the early morning, Nial, with the survivors of the garrison, retreated, keeping
along the strand, under cover of an English ship in the harbour, and took
refuge in the neighbourhood abbey at Magherabeg. Donegall Abbey never
recovered from the ruin of that night. After some years, when the terrible war
between Hugh Roe and the English had come to an end, the friars began to
creep out from their hiding places, and by degrees establish themselves in some
cottages which they built among the ruins of their late home. In these cottages
was written the Annals of the Four Masters. O’Donovan, at page 29 of the In-
troduction to his edition of the Annals, gives a curious account of the flight of
the friars from the abbey on the approach of the treacherous Nial Garv. He
tells us that it is taken from a manuscript history of the Franciscans, written by
a Father Purcell, and in the possession of the Franciscans at Louvain. It rans
thus :—‘‘ In the year 1600 we were in the convent of Donegall, forty brothers in
community, and the Divine offices for the night and the day were chanted with
great solemnity. I myself had charge of the sacristy, in which I had forty suits
of vestments with all their appurtenances, and many of them were of cloth of
gold and of silver, some were interwoven and ornamented with gold, all the rest
were silk. There were eighteen silver chalices of large size, all gilt except two ;
there were two ciboriums (or the most holy Sacrament.” Father Purcell then
proceeds to tell that at the approach of the English the brothers fled away, and
that he himself carried with him this altar furniture in a boat, all which, not
long after, fell into the hands of Oliver Lambert, the English Governor of Con-
naught, who converted the chalices into profane uses, and destroyed the vest-
ments.

After the peace made between Roderick O'Donnell and the King of England,
the former set about rebuilding the monastery, but, notwithstanding that his life
was in danger, he fled with O’Neill to Flanders, and thus the work was not pro-
ceeded with. Ware says this convent was famous for a well-stored library, which

