--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-257.png ---
County of Down. 225

664. The abbot St. Segineus died December the 1oth.”

665. Died the abbot Crittan; whose death was followed
by that of the abbot Mochua.* St. Florentius, or Flandus,
was abbot, and probably about this period.’

674. The abbey was destroyed by fire about this time.*

678. St Kennfaelus was abbot ; his feast is observed on the

8th of April.*

679. Died the abbot Colman.>

721. Died the abbot St. Malrubius ; his feast is on the 21st
of April.* Same year died the abbot Chronan whose feast is

on the 6th of November.?
729. Died Cochuler, the learned scribe of this abbey.*
743. Died the abbot Saran, whose feast is observed on the

Ist of August.!
We meet with a St. Daniel, who was either abbot or bishop
of Bangor, and whose feast is held on the 11th of September,

~ Tr. Th., Index. * M‘Geogh. % Fleming, sup. * Keating. * Fleming, sup.
© M'Geogh. °Calendar. *M‘Geogh, and Vard., p. 353. *Annal. Ulster. *M'Geogh.

The superior of Bangor was styled ‘‘ Abbot of Bangor” and ‘‘ Successor of
Comgall.” The 18th hymn of the office-book. or Antiphonary of Bangor, is en-
titled ‘‘ The Commemoration of our Abbots,” and contains a list of fifteen abbots.
Their names are recited in the old book, which is now nearly twelve hundred
years in a foreign country, precisely in the same order as they occur in the annals,
which have been preserved in this country, a circumstance which bears important
testimony to the fidelity of our domestic records. Dr. Reeves, in the Ulster
Journal of Archeology, gives the following translation of that valuable docu-
ment :—

“ The holy, valiant deeds
Of sacred fathers,
Based on the matchless
Church of Bangor;

“ The noble deeds of abbots,
Their number, times, and names,
Of never-ending lustre—
Hear, brothers, great their desert,
Whom the Lord hath gathered
To the mansions of his heavenly kingdom.

“Christ loved Comgall,
Well too did he, the Lord ;
He held Beogna dear ;
He graced the ruler Aedh;
He chose the holy Sillan,
A famous teacher of the world,
Whom the Lord hath gathered
To the mansions of his heavenly kingdom.

“ He made Finten accepted,
An heir generous, renowned ;
He rendered Maclaisre illustrious,
The chief of all the abbots ;
With a sacred torch (the enlightened) Segene,
A great physician of Scripture.
Whom the Lord, &c.

