--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-234.png ---
202 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

probably on the site of the ancient abbey, for friars of the
order of St. Francis! The present church is supposed to be

© War, Mon.

self with all his riches in the wood of Gleann Beatha (Glenveagh). Leading to
this valley there were three passes through which the enemy could advance to
attack him : these were at once seized by the royal army formed into three divi-
sions, commanded respectively by the English general, Niall Garve, and Mac
Swiney Doe. Sir Cahir hearing this, formed his comparatively small army also
into three divisions, and posted them at the three entrances into the wood to
prevent the advance of the reyal army. After the lapse of a few hours the enemy’s
musqueteers opened fire on one of O’Doherty’s divisions, and the cor
but rash young chieftain, advanced at the head of another division to drive back the
enemy. In the mé/ée he ceceived the stab of a double-headed javelin, and died in
the space of two hours without being expiated from his sins by sacramental abso-
lution.” This circumstantial account, along with the extract quoted from
the Inquisition, shows the utter groundlessness of a story current in
Inishowen, and which has found its way into print. Accordii to it
Sir Cahir did not fall in the engagement, but was foully and treacherously
murdered by a Scotchman. named Ramsay, under the rock of Doon. The story
goes that the young chieftain, attended only by his faithful friend and adviser,
Sir Phelim Reagh MacDevitt, had come to the rock of Doon to reconnoitre the
enemy's position, and, being worn with fatigue, they both lay down under the shelter
of the rock for a short sleep. In this state they were discovered by the infamous
Ramsay, who, recognising Sir Cahir, ran him through with his sword, and fled.
Sir Phelim MacDevitt was roused from his sleep by the moans of his brave and
lant young friend. He started up; saw the pale face, and the red stream flowi:
rom a wound in his side, on which the hand of the dying man was tightly pressed.
He saw that life was ebbing fast, and that no time was to be lost, so he raised
the dying form gently from the ground, placed it on his shoulders, and hurried
to the camp. He did not get far when the poor young chieftain implored him,
in faint whispers, to lay him down as he was dying, and, at the same time, gave
him, as his last injunction, to take off his head, as soon as he breathed his last,
bring it to Dublin, and there demand the large reward offered for it. Sir Phelim
carried out this dying request, but on his way to Dublin with the head, he hap-
pened to stay a night at Swords, where one of the Chichesters, who had learned
the object of Sir Phelim’s mission, also put up, contrived to steal the head during
the night, proceeded to Dublin, and got the reward. This story is exploded, as
has been already observed, by the united testimony of the jurors of King James
and of O’Sullivan Beare, which shows that Sir Cahir fell in the engagement at Kil-
macrenan, We have also the authority of the Four Masters to the same effect.
They state, under 1608, that Sir Cahir’s body was quartered between Derry and
Culmore, and his head sent to Dublin by the English commander, which proves the
story about Sir Phelim MacDevitt to be utterly false. And lastly, it is not true
that Chichester obtained the grant of Inishowen in reward for the head of Sir
Cahir O'Doherty, for in aninquisition taken at Donegal on the 18th of August, 1625,
it is affirmed by the jurors on oath that Inishowen was held by Chichester “as of
the castle of Dublin in free and common socage, by fealty only and not in capite,
nor by socage in capite, nor by knight's service” ercfore, Chichester obtained
Inishowen, not by stealing O'Doherty’s head from Sir Phelim MacDevitt, but by
Sree and common socage. But slander and invention, in regard to the young and
ill-fated chieftain of Inishowen, as well as his brave and faithful ally, Sir Phelim
MacDevitt, don’t stop here. Cox and other prejudiced writers, in their account
of Sir Cahir O’Doherty’s rebellion, say that his first act, namely the taking of
Culmore, was one of “cool and base treachery.” “Having.” writes one of the
most modern of these reckless historians, ‘‘ collected together [he is talking of
O'Doherty] his friend and a considerable number of his Irish fullowers, he invited
Captain Hart, the governor of Culmore fort, with whom he lived on terms of
intimacy, to come, with his wife, to dine with him, on the 3rd of May. O'Doherty
received his guests with profuse hospitality, but in the middle of the feast armed

