--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-308.png ---
272 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

Mary of the yoke of God, was founded on 25th of August, in
the year 1192 or 1193," by Africa, daughter of Godred, King
of Man, and wife to Mr John de Courcey. She furnished it
with Cistertian monks from the abbey of Holmcultrain in
Cumberland, and chose to take up her last residence here.°

1237. J the abbot, was in this year a subscribing
witness to Hugh de Lacie’s grant to the abbey of Newry.P

Walter Barnewood, in 1380, held two carucates of land in
Holmgrange from the abbot of this monastery, for the term
of ten years, at the rent of five marcs.9

Inquisition 5th November, 1st K. James, finds that John
Cassels, the last abbot, was, 1st February, 32nd K. Henry
VIII, seized of the abbey, &c. ; also of seven townlands cir-
cumjacent to the said abbey, viz., Corballye, Ballibrenny,
Ballenbelye, Ballevaltra, Ballecaslane, Ballenallane, and Balle-
cullemanagh ; also three townlands in Lecale, viz., Balletun-
geange, Balleedon, and Corballen, with the tithes, &c., belong-
ing to the said lands, all in this county ; annual value of said
abbey, &c., 405.7

Three carucates of land in Ballymotes, alias Ballinemonogh ;
one carucate in Hilletstone, alias Ballyhillet ; one in Carnarie ;
one in Ballynclere; a quarter carucate in Killena, alias
Killeney ; one carucate in Cashenmogheune ; two carucates
in Ballinquinuter, alias Quiltestone ; one carucate in Bally-
lenagh ; one in Ballincloite in the Dufferans ; two in Bally-
kallet ; one in Sheffoundbogge ; and one in Holmgrange,
part of the possessions of this abbey, were granted to Gerald
Earl of Kildare. See Lismullen in county of Meath.™

This abbey was ruined in the rebellion raised by Tyrone,
towards the close of the reign of Queen Elizabeth.*

The statue of the foundress, in alto relievo, carved in free-
stone, though much defaced, is yet to be seen in an arch on
the gospel side of the high altar ; the building was large and
magnificent, the east window of the church is a noble Gothic
design of three compartments, each about six feet in width, and
upwards of twenty in height; on the north and south walls,
on each side of the altar, is a large window of freestone, neatly
carved, and of the same breadth with the east window, but

2 Annal. St. Mary, Dubl. Pembridge. ° War. Mon. ? King, p. 370. ld.
* Chief Rememb. ™ Aud. Gen. * Hist. County of Down, p. 268.

further injury, except that of time, by the laudable care of their distinguished
proprietor, A few years since, when the floor of the Abbey was cleared of the
rubbish which had collected upon it, a leaden seal was found bearing the following
legend :—‘RADULPHUS: DEI GRACIA KARLEOLENSIS EpiscuHop.’ This Bishop
of Carlisle was Radulphus de Ireton, who was appointed to that see in 1280.—
(Godwin de Praesul., p. 765). At the Dissolution, this Abbey was seized of sixteen
townlands in the neighbourhood, and of the rectories of two parishes.”

