--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-146.png ---
120 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

duffe fifteen acres ; the island of Insiquiny, with three acres of
unprofitable, and a chief rent out of the island of Cloghaule,
parcel of the possessions of said house, to hold to him and his
heirs, at the annual rent of £15 3s. 6d., Irish money.>&

Ware supposes this to be the abbey which St. Bernard calls
Monasterium Ibracense, but Allemande is more inclined to
think that Begery, in county of Wexford, is that monastery.

The monks of this abbey erected the first salmon weirs
on the river Lee, near the city of Cork. The remains of
this building were totally demolished about the year 1745.

Grey Friary" Dermot M‘Carthy Reagh founded this

boo Aud. Gen.

1? Grey Friary—The MS. History of the Franciscan Order in Ireland, written by F.
Francis Ward, O.S.F., in 1632, gives the following de‘ails connected with this con-
vent:—‘‘The convent of Cork, called also the monastery of the Blessed Virgin Mary
of Shandon, was founded in the episcopal city of Cork, in the year 1214, and com-
pleted in the year 1229. Father Wadding says that this monastery, on account of
Its strict observance of regular life, and the piety of the brethren, was formerly
called ‘the mirror of all Ireland.’ It was erected into a custodia in the year 1260,
in the general chapter of Narbonne. It passed to the Friars of the Reformed
Observance previous to the year 1500, and remained in their possession till the
year 1540, when heresy and persecution began to rage, and it was the first convent
in all Ireland that was suppressed by the heretics. It remained desolate till the
year 1600, when in the provincialate of F. Maurice Ultan, a residence was erected
in that city, and F. William Farris was appointed guardian, and from that time
to the present day (1632), the friars labour with great fruit for the salvation of the
faithful and the conversion of the heretics. The first founder of the convent was
Dermod MacCarthy More, called Dondraynean, King of the people of Munster ;
and some provincial kings of his kindred were buried there in the habit of the
Friars Minors. The most powerful family of the MacCarthys also erecteda
mausoleum for themselves in that Convent, till, in the course of time, they were
divided into several noble families, each of which built a special convent for its
own immediate members. Besides the tombs of the MacCarthys, and of fourteen
Knights of Mora, the families of the Barrys and the chief nobles and citizens of
that county are buried there. Philip Prendergast, the Treasurer of King John of
England, who was one of the greatest benefactors tothis house, is also buried there.
A curious charter of his to the convent will be found in Wadding. A chapter
was held in this convent in 1224. 1288, 1521, and 1533. One of the most remark-
able religious of this convent was F, Francis Matthew, who, after being Guardian
in Cork, his native city, was appointed Provincial in 1626, and was subsequently
Guardian of St. Anthony's, in Louvain. In his writings he assumed the name of
Orsulanus. and it was in reply to him that Paul Harris wrote his curious Arktomatix,
hea whip for the Bear. F. Matthew was put to death for the faith in Cork, in the

ear 1644.

» Inquisition sth April, XXX. Elizabeth, finds that Andrew Skiddeis, late of
the City of Cork. gent., was seized in fee of the precincts of this priory with
three gardens near Cork ; the moiety of a water-mill, the third part of another
mill; a 1 of water called the Friar's Pool; the right of fishing for salmon
in Gaule’s weir from sunset on Saturday to sunrise on Sunday ; also one salmon
on every Friday out of the said fishery, provided two fish were taken; forty
acres of land in the townland of Templenamkahir, with the appurtenances,
all the said premises being of the annual value of 40s. ; also a park, containing
by estimation, one acre, annual value §5.; also certain gardens belonging to the
friary, annual value 6s. ; all the said premises being in the county of Cork, and
held from the Queen in capite by knight's services.

“ Ordnance Survey MS., R.1.A.” vol. iv., p. §2.

