--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-058.png ---
40 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

1107. Moelpatrick O’Drugan entered upon the divinity
lecturership of this abbey on the feast of St. Albe.t

1108. Died the archidach Aid; he was the son of Dubdaleth,
the third bishop of Armagh, and, had he lived, would have
been promoted to the comorbship of St. Patrick;" from this
and other instances it appears, that many of the clergy in
Ireland, and in other countries, were married men; and to this
effect Doctor Lynch, the learned author of Cambrensis Eversus,
writes to Roderick O’Flaherty.*

1112, The citadel, with the churches, two streets in Trian
Massain, and a third in Trian Mor, were destroyed by fire ;
from hence it appears, that the town was formerly divided
into four parts:—1. Rath Patrick, ze, the citadel. 2. Trian
Mor, ze. the greater third portion. 3. Trian Massain, ze.,

. 4 Trian Saxon, ze, the third portion of the
Saxons; here the English students resided.* ®

1113. Died Flannagan, the son of Moelisa, who, had he
lived, would have succeeded to the abbacy.”

1116. The abbey, with twenty other buildings, was this year
consumed by fire.*

1121. Two streets in Trian Massain, from the gate of Rathene
to the cross of St. Brigid, were burned ;* and in the month of
December, a great tempest blew down the roof of the
tower.

Tr. Th. ibid, “Id. “O'Flaherty ut supra. *Tr. Th, ibid. Id. p. 300. "Id.
“Id. Id.

™ The assertion made here by our author that the Irish clergy did not practise
celibacy is painfully out of place among his notices of so many saintly bishops and
priests who looked upon chastity as the brightest among the sacerdotal virtues in
which they strove to excel. This is not the place to refute at any length such an
assertion. For our present purpose it is enough to quote a few of the enactments
which were binding in this matter, in the ancient Irish church:—

a. ‘Si quis clericus vel superior gradus, qui uxorem habuit, et post honorem
iteram eam cognoverit, sciat se adulterium commississe.” (Canon in Missal of
Columbanus. )

4, “Si quis autem clericus, aut diaconus vel alicujus gradus, qui laicus fuit in
seculo cum filiis et filiabus, post conversionem suam iterum suam cognoverit
clientelam, et filium iterum de ea genuerit, sciat se adulterium perpetrasse, et non
minus peccasse quam si a juventute sua clericus fuisset et cum puella aliena pec-
casset, quia post votum suum peccavit, post quam se Domino consecravit, et
votum suum iritum fecit, idcirco septem annis in pane et aqua peniteat.” (St.
Columbanus, Liber, de Penitentiarum mensura taxanda.)

¢. “Si clericus aut monachus, post quam se Deo voverit, ad secularem habitum
iterum reversus fuerit, aut uxorem duxerit decem annis peniteat, tribus ex his in
pane et aqua, et nunquam postea in conjugio copuletur. Quod si noluerit, Sancta
Synodus, vel sedes apostolica seperavit eos a communione et convocationibus
Catholicorum.” S¢. Cummian, Penitentiale. See ‘Irish Ecclesiastical Record,”
vol. iv.: “ The Bishop of Argyle and the early Celtic Church,” pag. 473, seqq.

33 7rian means a third portion; but, like our ‘‘quarter” it came to signify ‘‘a
district,” without any reference to proportion. In the case of Armagh, however,
the numerical import of the word was observed, for there were only the 7rian
Mor, or ‘‘Great Ward;” Zrian Masain, or Masan’s Ward; and 7rian Saxan, or

“

