--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-318.png ---
282 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

Magherclin,® on the river Lagan, four miles and a half
north west of Dromore, in the barony of Lower Iveagh.

St. Colman, or Mocholmoc, who died 30th of March, A.D.
699, founded the monastery of Lann, or Linn, or Linn huac-
huille, in the east of Ulster.

Maralin is now a parish church in the diocess of Dromore?

4 Act. SS.,~. 792. * Visitation Book.

difficulty in identifying Rathscillan, as there is no place in that neighbourhood
known by the name; and yet, as is evident by the grouping of the names, it must
have been in the neighbourhood of Maghera, and, like Maghera, it must have been
in early times the scene ofthe piety and labours of some eminent ecclesiastic. Rath-
scillan signifies ‘‘tHe Rath of Cillan.” St. Donard had a brothe named Cillan,
whose church was somewhere in the neighbourhood. /£ngus the Culdee, in his
tract on the ‘‘ Mothers of the Saints of Ireland.” refers to Cillen (Killen) in a pas-
sage which we translate from Colgan’s Latin translation of the original Irish :—
“* Derinilla, called Cethuir-Chicheach .(#.e., of the four provinces), was the mother
of SS. Domangart (Donard), son of Eachach and Aillean, and Aidan, and Muran
of Fathen (now Fahan in Inishowen), and Mochumma of Drumbo, and Cillen of
Achadhcail, in the territory of Lecale, at the bank of the estuary of Dundrum.” In
a field in Wateresk belonging to Mr. Savage, and immediately adjoining his house,
are the remains of an ancient cemetery which once was enclosed in a rath. The
bodies were interred in graves lined with flag-stones, and a large granite stone stood
in the cemetery, but it has been rolled into a stream which bounds the field; on this
stone is inscribed a simple cross formed by the intersection of two pair of parallel
lines. Mr. Savage, whois not accountable for the barbarous removal of the incised
stone, has promised to have it rolled back to its original position. This site exactly
corresponds with that of the Church of St. Cillen, as described by Aingus the
Culdee. It is in the territory of Lecale, and it is close to the estuary of Dundrum,
while it adjoins the lands attached to the Church of Maghera, which would account
for the expression in the “ Patent Roll,” “ Rathmurvul (Maghera) along with
Rathscillan.” By the privileges recited in this ‘+ Patent Roll” the bishop was em-
Powered to create boroughs where he might think it would be advantageous, as at
irleth (Kilclief), Rathmurvul (Maghera), to be ruled by such laws and customs as
he might select. In the ‘‘ Terrier of such lands as appertaine and belonge to the
Bishoprick of Down and Connor,” a document of the date of 1615, is an entry—
“at Rathra, a/ias Matherath, four townelands, spiritualities, and temporalities.” At
the margin of this entry the name of ‘‘Jn. O'Laithlan” is entered as tenant.
This name is intended probably for O’Loughlin, and one of the townlands of
Maghera is named Ballyloughlin. In 1622 the Magenises had laid claim to the
ancient see lands of Maghera ; and the Protestant bishop complains—‘* Item the
foure ‘Townes or Magherera being ancyently known by the Bps. landes were
lately found by an Inquisition to Sr. Arthur Mognely (Magenis), and to some of his
freeholders of the which Inquisition a great part of the jurors were of the name of
Magyness.” It is not unlikely that the jurisdiction of the Bishop of Maghera_ ex-
tended over the parish of Maghera and the parishes of Kilkeel, Kilcoo, and Kil-
megan, which in later timer were under the jurisdiction of the ‘‘ Plebanus” of
Kilkeel, though the parish of Maghera was never under the spiritual care of that
dignitary, being immediately under the bishop. In the report of the Protestant
- bishop in 1622 it isdescribed “Magherah, a chappel ruynous consisting of four or five
townes very small. The Bps. Mensall, the two partes of all the Tithes belong to
ye Bp.” This was obviously the old Catholic arrangement. In the Pope Nicholas
taxation the parish of Maghera was valued at twenty shillings. ut in the
“Terrier” of 1615 the entry is “ Matherira, it is a mensal, and hath four town-
lands; it pays in proxies, 4s.; in refections 4s.; in synodals, 2s.”

39 Magheralin—See Reeves’ Eccl. Antiq., pp. 110 and 307; but observe Cassan
Linne is the river Lagan which rises in county Monaghan, and flowing through
part of I.outh, empties itself into the sea at Annaghassan, é.c., Ath-na-Gassan. How
could a Scandinavian fleet sail on the Lagan at Magheralin?


