--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-045.png ---
The County Armagh. 27

year, or in 457, for Regular Canons of the order of St. Augus-
tin, and dedicated it to the apostles, St. Peter and St. Paul ;4

Isher, Trias Th. p. 293.
[merely] said, Daire is sick; we pray thee let something of thine be carried to him,
if, peradventure, he may be healed. But St. Patrick, knowing what had been done,
said, yes, verily; and he blessed some water, and gave it to them, saying, go ye,
sprinkle your horse with this water, and then take it with you. And they did so,
and the horse came to life again, and they carried the water with them, and Daire
was healed when he was sprinkled with the consecrated water.

“« After this Daire came that he might do honour to the saint, and brought with
him a valuable imported cauldron which held three firkins. And Daire said to the
saint, thou mayest have this cauldron. And Patrick said,Grazacham (i.e., gratias, ago
oragam). Then Daire returned home and said, the man is a fool, who had nota civil
word tosay but Grazacham, in return for the beautiful three-firkin cauldron. More-
over, Daire said to his servants, go and bring me back my cauldron. So theycame and
said to Patrick, we must take away the cauldron. Notwithstanding, on this occasion
also, Patrick said, Grazacham; you may take it away. So they took it away. And
Daire enquired of his servants what the Christian said when they took back the
cauldron, and they replied: he said Grazacham. Then Daire answered and said:
Grazacham when we give, and Grazacham when we take away; surely this Graza-
cham of his must be a good word; therefore, the brazen cauldron shall be restored
to him. And this time Daire came in person, carrying the cauldron to Patrick,
and said to him, thy cauldron shall remain with thee, for thou art an upright and
unswerving man. Moreover, I now grant to thee my whole right in that portion
of ground which thou formerly didst desire, and dwell thou there. And that is
the city which now is called Arddmacha. And they went forth together, both St.
Patrick and Daire, to view the admirable and pleasing gift; and they ascended the
height, and found a roe and a little fawn with her, lying on the spot where the
altar of the northern church in Arddmacha now stands. And St. Patrick’s com-
panions wanted to catch the fawn and kill it; but the saint objected, and would not
permit them; nay, he even took up the fawn himself, and carried it on his
shoulders, and the roe followed him like a pet sheep, until he laid the fawn on
another eminence, at the north side of Armagh, where, according to the statement
of those who are familiar with the ground, miraculous attestations are to be wit-
nessed at this day.”—‘‘ Book of Armagh” (fol. 6 b, b).

Having thus, at length, obtained from Daire the Druim-sailech, which had
been before refused to him, St. Patrick proceeded to build upon it. According
to the ‘‘ Tripartite Life,” our apostle, with his religious community and Daire, went
up the hill to measure it for the building and to consecrate it. ‘*The apex of the
hill being probably enclosed with an earthen rampart, and the slope having like-
wise two entrenched defences, we can conceive a little monastic group of buildings
occupying the level space, consisting of a larger and smaller church, the latter,
which was called the Saéha/, or northern church, situate on the north side, and such
conventual buildings as were usual, consisting of a Zechmor (‘great house’), or
residence ; a Cuscin, or ‘kitchen ;’ an Airegal, or ‘sacristy,’ while the space on
the south side of the great church was devoted to a Reilig, or ‘cemetery.’ Such
was the amount of the primitive establishment. . . The town of Ardmagh con-
sisted, at an early date, of two main departments, the Rath, which was the nucleus,
and the Trians or wards, which were three in number, and formed the outer belt of
habitation. It would be almost impossible, at the present day, to define the
Rath or central enclosure with exactness ; but we may take the outline communi-
cated to Stuart, and printed by him in his appendix, p. 588. According to it the
upper enclosure or entrenchment, commencing on the west, observed pretty
much the course of Callan-street, the circle being continued across Abbey-street,
a little below the Infirmary, and through the Gardens, round to Market-street.
The lower enclosure leaves still a trace where it crossed Abbey-street, at the
Wesleyan Chapel.”—Rceves (op. cit. p. 13, 14).

The edifices within the upper ring were:—

1, The Dambliaec (pronounced Duleck) Mor, or Great Stone Church, probably

