--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-228.png ---
196 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

wrote a work in his praise ; he was killed by pirates about
the year 590, and was interred with his friend; his festival
is held on January the 29th. Here is a celebrated well
which, with the church, is dedicated to St. Conald, and
yearly visited by a great concourse of pilgrims on the 12th of
May."

Tais Samer ; an island in the bay of Donegall, at the mouth
of the river Erne. There seems to have been a religious
house on this island, for we find that Flaherty O’Maoldora,
King of Conall, or Tyrconnell, Inisoen, and of the districts of
Easdara and Loughgille, having renounced the cares of the
world, and dedicated himself to heaven, died in this island in
the year 1197.”

* Harris Tab. ° Butlers Fourncy. ~ Annal. Munst.

eminent Irish scholar, B. O’Looney, Esq., and given in the proceedings of the
Royal Irish Academy.

Colgan, at p. 204 of his Acta Sanctorum, says that the merits of St. Connell
are set forth in a beautiful panegyric pronounced upon him by St. Dallan, who
was his intimate friend and enthusiastic admirer. This St. Dallan was a very
distinguished scholar and antiquarian. He was the author of the celebrated
Amhra Coluim Cille, a written eulogium on the virtues and great parts of St.
Columba, which he recited at the famous Synod of Drumceat, at which St.
Columba himself was present.

The learning and ability of St. Dallan are praised at great length by Colgan,
who enumerates a good many of his works which he himself had seen and read,
but found very difficult to understand. These works, like others of the same
class, have disappeared, unfortunately, since Colgan’s time. Between St. Dallan
and St. Connell there existed, as I have already remarked, the closest friendship,
and hence we find St. Dallan often on a visit with St. Connell at Iniskeel. This
friendship grew at last into an intense affection, which made St. Dallan frequently
pray that he might be buried in the same grave with St. Connell, to whom he
mentioned the subject of this prayer, and accompanied it with a request that if he
were the survivor he would take care to have his remains laid in the grave which
he had prepared for himself in Iniskeel. On the occasion of one of these visits
of St. Dallan to the island, a band of pirates broke into the monastery, and in
their career of plunder seized St. Dallan, cut off his head, and flung it into the sea.
St. Connell, who contrived to escape the fury of the pirates, when he came forth
from his hiding place and heard the fate of his dear friend, fell upon his knees,
and prayed with great fervour for a short time, when the head of St. Dallan rose
out of the waters, advanced and replaced itself upon the trunk, and then St.
Connell buried the body in the grave destined for himself, where the two saints
now repose, under the walls of that monastery in which they had spent so man:
happy days together. Up to within six or seven years a very remarkable relic of
St. Connell was preserved in Boylagh. It was called the Bearnan-Chonaill, ox
bell of St. Connell, and was in the possession of the O’Breslens, a family in the
neighbourhood, who ciaimed the saint as belonging to their stock. Some twenty-
five years ago the representative of this family, who lived in the valley of Glen-
geash, near Ardara, sold the relic to Major Nesbit for £6 ; after the Major's death
it passed into the hands of one of his heirs, Mr. Evans, who carried it with him to
Birmingham. After his death it could not be found among his effects; he is
supposed to have sold it, but where, or to whom, has baffled inquiry up to this
resent moment. Dr. Petrie has a notice of it ina paper of his on the Ancient
rish Bells, in the transactions of the Royal Irish, Academy ; and O’Donovan, in
his unpublished papers for the Irish Survey, tells us that he saw it in the posses-
sion of Major Nesbit at Ardara. He describes it as a very beautiful and elaborate
telic, closely resembling the Armagh bell described by Dr. Stewart. It was, he

