--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-270.png ---
238 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

hands, as an alien priory in 1395, and the custody of the same
was granted to the archbishop on the rgth of July in that year
at the rent of ten marcs, who annexed it to his see.4

By an inquisition taken 5th of November, ist King James,
it was found that the last abbot, Ist August, 35th King
Henry VIII, was seized of the abbey, with three townlands
adjacent, viz., Black Abbey, Ballenemanogh and Ballcarrocke,
with the tithes thereof; annual value, 23s. 4d. Also of the
lands and tenements in the Ardes, cammonly called le Turnt-
nes lands, with the tithes of Enischargie, parcel of the said
lands, and belonging to the rectory or vicarage of Enischargie ;
also of Talbotstown, Donnoghe-Dee and Whitechurch ; annual
value, besides reprises, 3/.94

9 War. Mon. and Bps., p. 84. “Chief Rememb.

hands. In 1382 it was under the government of a prior; and in 1389 the office
was held by one Thomas. —(Cal. Canc., p. 140 b.)

In 1390 Primate Colton presented a petition to the King, setting forth that
license had been granted by Edward III. to Richard, Archbishop of Armagh, and
his successors, to purchase such alien priories and cells of the French, in Ireland,
as did not exceed 100 marks a year, and that said Richard had made the above
purchase from the abbey of Lonley, but that after his death it had been seized to
the Crown, and praying for its restoration. Upon this, Richard White, prior of
the hospital of St. John of Jerusalem, Richard Russell, and William Merser were
appointed to examine into the merits of the claim.—(Cal. Canc., p. 142.)

in 1395 the custody of the priory was granted by the King to the same primate,
subject to 10 marks per annum. Still, however, it seems to have been regarded
as having a foreign relation, for in 1411 the King ranted to John Chenele the
alien priory of Eynes in Arde, within the lordship of Ulster, which had been seized
into the King's hands by reason of the war between him and France.—(See above,
p- 22.) During the wars of the O’Neills these lands were taken possession of by
them, and by their rebellion were supposed to be vested in the Crown. Hence it
was that James Hamilton, Viscount Clandeboy, succeeded in obtaining a grant of
them, and the appendant rectories and advowsons. The lands he assigned to Sir
Hugh Montgomery of the Ards. The See of Armagh, did not, however, abandon
its claim to them or their appurtenances. for in 1622, Primate Hampton made the
following return :—‘‘ Withheld by Sir Hugh Montgomery, Kn*, and Sir James
Hamylton, Kn*., y* Black Priory of St. Andrew's in the Ardes. Sometyme the
lands of Prior Aliens, and bonght by one of my predecessors, for the mayntenance
of his successor's table, from the Abbot and Convent of Clonley in Normandy, by
license of King Edward the third, with allowance of the poope ; for the sum of 200
ster., paid by my predecessor, in Paule’s Church in London: which priory doth
consist of three towne lands and five impropriations.”—( Ulster Visitation.)

According to Harris. the priory was awarded to the See of Armagh in 1639.
Until the middle of the last century, the representatives of the Lord Viscount Clan-
boy claimed the right of patronage to the united vicarages of Talbotstown, White
Church, and Inishargy, under the name of the parish of St. Andrews ; but a suit
which was instituted by Primate Stone against Viscount Mount Alexander, con-
cerning the advowson to the vicarage of Donaghadee, having resulted in favour of
the plaintiff, re-established the See of Armagh in the enjoyment of this portion of
its ancient rights. The five impropriations, spoken of above, were the rectories of
Donaghadee, Whitechurch or Ballywalter, Talbotstown or Ballyhalbert, Inish-
argy, and Derryaghy.—(Reeves’ “eel. Antiq.,” page 383).

Enischargie, now Inishargy, in the barony of Ardes.

Talbotstown, now Ballyhalbert.

White Church, now Ballywalter.

