--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-320.png ---
284 Aucient Monasteries of Ireland.

Same year the Danes destroyed the town, and all its sacred
edifices, by fire.*

853. Died A&ngus M‘Longsich, archidnach of this abbey.!

986. Died the abbot Tuathal M‘Moylcowa.™

1098. Died, in pilgrimage, the abbot Flathbertach, the son
of Tigernach."

1136. Died the abbot Gilda Christus, or Christian
O’Hechain?

1149. The town and abbey were plundered in this year.?

1170. Amlave, who had been expelled the abbey of Drogh-
eda for his many misdemeanors, was made abbot of Magh-
bill; and soon after, in conjunction with Eochadha, King of
Ulidia, and some of his people, he drove the abbot and
monks of Saul out of the abbey, which had been built by
themselves, and plundered them of their books, vestments,
and other holy furniture, with their herds, their flocks, and
all their goods whatsoever ; but this wicked action did not
pass unpunished, for on that same Thursday, in the ensuing
year, Eochadha and his followers, fell by the sword of a much
inferior enemy, and their king being desperately wounded,
was, on the Thursday after, murdered by the hands of his
own brother at Down, the place where this wicked deed was
conceived and concluded upon ;1 but these ecclesiastical his-
torians, tender of the character of the church, do not tell us
what was the fate of Amlave.

1274. Died the abbot Gille Christ Colman; in his place
the abbey elected Christianus, one of their canons without
obtaining the Royal licence; but the King, on account
of their exility, pardoned their transgression, restored their
temporalities, and granted a licence to proceed to the election
of a proper person, provided that this should not hereafter be
made use of as a precedent,’ and Christianus was successful
in his sccond election.’ James M‘Guilmore was abbot at the
time this abbey fell in the general suppression ; on the Ist
of February, 1542, he was found to be seized of seven town-
lands, both in spirituals and temporals, and all of them ad-
jacent to the said abbey, viz.:—

Ballemaville, Ballenhanlea, Ballabaga, Bellenrya, Balleharry,
Ballegromnerk ; and the two townlands of Dromkerry and
‘Ballyhuggan, in Upper Clandeboy, only in spirituals ; and a
townland and an half in the Little Ardes, called the Derry,
but in spirituals also; four townlands of Luggan Droma, in
spirituals; Anathdalor, and seven townlands in the country
of South M‘O’Neill, in this country, in spirituals only ; Agal-

* Act. SS p. 650 ‘Id. M‘Geogh. ™ M'Geogh. » Id. and Act. SS., p- 4X5.

eld. Tr Th., p. 633. Act. SS., p. 650. * Harris's Coll., vol. 1, and King,
2-345. * King, Lbid.

