--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-233.png ---
County of Donegall. 201

St. Columb founded an abbey here, which was richly en-
dowed.2. And O'Donnell founded a small house here,

* Tr. Th, p. 494.

bishop. Here, too, at a short distance from the town, on the rock of Doon, the
O’Donnell’s were inaugurated chieftains of Tircounell, but all this importance, all
this ancient splendour, is now reduced to a dilapidated village, contrasting miser-
ably with its pretty situation in a highland valley through which courses a broad
and deep river. Doon, the place where the ceremony of inauguration was held,
is a rocky eminence, rising sharply from the ground. The inauguration stone
was here, with the foot-prints of the first chieftain cut into it, in which the new
chieftain stood while he took the oath to maintain the laws of Tirconnell,
and defend her rights and privileges—a ceremony described by Spenser in his
“View of the State of Ireland.” By some it is stoutly denied that the ceremony was

erformed on the hill of Doon ; they say the inauguration stone was always kept
in the,old abbey church of Kilmacrenan, and in this they seem to be sustained by
the Four Masters, who speak of the stone being actually kept in the church.
How far this may be true or false is now matter of speculation. The stone has
disappeared, and how or where is also simple conjecture. There are persons of
grave and deliberate judgment who assert that it was stolen, and is still preserved
in safe keeping. Others, on the contrary, say that a pervert of the name of
MacSwiney, in a fit of fury against the relics of the old faith, smashed it into a
thousand small pieces, which he scattered abroad so as to prevent them from
being recognised or collected ever after. The sculptured head over the principal
“door of the present Protestant church is also battered and broken by the same
hatred which prompted the destruction of the inauguration stone. That the
ceremony of inauguration took place either at the rock of Doon or in the old
church is admitted on all hands, and is graphically described by a well informed
author called Lynch. He says ‘‘that when the investiture of the O’Donnell took
place at Cil-mhac-Crenain, he was attended by O'Ferghail, successor to Columb-

ille, and O’Gallachius, his marshal, and surrounded by all the estates of the
country. The Abbot O’Ferghail put a pure white, straight, unknotted rad into
his hand, and said, ‘ Receive, sire, the auspicious ensign of your dignity, and
remember to imitate in your government the whiteness, straightness, and unknot-
tiness of this rod, to the end that no evil tongue may find cause to asperse the
candour of your actions with blackness. nor any kind of corruption or tie of friend-
ship be able to pervert your justice ; therefore, in a lucky hour, take the govern-
ment of this peuple, to exercise the power given you with freedom and security.’””
Close to the rock of Doon is a holy well to which pilgrims come in considerable
numbers at all seasons of the year, and from the remotest corners of the country.
Proofs are advanced with day, date, and name of miraculous cures effected at this
well, and there is hardly in the whole county of Donegal a Catholic family that
does not always keep at home, in some safe place, a bottle of water from Doon
well, It was blessed by a holy priest, Lector O’Friel, whose memory is still in
benediction among the people of Kilmacrenan. It was under this rock of Doon
that Sir Cahir O’Doherty fell while fighting bravely for his rights against the
English. This dauntless young chieftain still lives in the memory of the men of
Inishowen. He was their hero, and because of the early period put to his career,
they speak of him in a tone of deep sorrow and regret. His sad and premature
end is thus recorded in an inquisition of James I.. c. 6:—“ The said Cahire
O'Doherty, knight, afterwards, to wit, on the 5th of July in the year aforesaid,
being in rebellion a¢ and near Kilmacrenan, in the county of Donegal, together
with the said other traitors, fought and contended with the army or soldiers of the
said king then and there remaining. The aforesaid Cahire O’Doherty, knight,
so contending, was slain, and the jurors saw the body and members of the said
Cahire then and there slain.” The fact of his being slain in red-handed rebellion
atand near Kilmacrenan, is here stated in a manner that precludes all doubt. The
details of the engagement in which he fell are graphically described by O’Sullivan
Beare in his “ History of Irish Catholics,” fol. 210, tome iv., lib. i. “ O’Doherty,”
he writes, ‘‘ considering his own unequal to the forces of the enemy, concealed him-

