--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-169.png ---
County of Cork. 143

united to the diocese of Cork, and situate on an arm of the
sea, in the barony of Carbury.
St. Fachnan mongach, or the Hairy, abbot of Moelanfaidh,

related of our saint that it was his daily habit to retire for silent recollection and
rivate prayer to a secluded spot on the side of a hill, near the monastery. It
Pappened that one day he left his scroll of prayers behind him. Rain fell heavily
during the night, but in the morning his prayer-book was as dry as Gideon’s fleece,
for the angels had built a small chapel over it. The traces of this ancient oratory
may still be seen, The precise date of the foundation of the celebrated monastery
of Ross cannot be fixed with certainty. Ware says it was founded about the year
590, and his opinion has been adopted by later writers. It would, probably, be
more accurate to place the foundation of the monastery before the year 570, and
the death of the saint about the year 590. The Life of St. Mochaemog states, that
it was by the advice of St. Ita that St. Fachtna proceeded from the monastery
of Ross to the parents of Mochaemog, through whose merits his sight was restored
tohim. St. Brendan, patron of Kerry, is also mentioned among those who visited
and gave lessons of heavenly wisdom in Ross. These two facts sufficiently prove
that the monastery was established before the death of St. Brendan, which took
place in 577, and of St. Ita, which is marked in our Annals in 570.
In some Latin documents our saint receives the epithet Kachina facundus, “St.
Fachtna the eloquent :” sometimes his name is simply Latinized Sanctus Facundus.
In the Irish records he generally receives the designation of Mac Mongach, i.e.,
“ the hairy child,” because athis birth his head was covered with hair :—‘Fachtna,
Mongach quia cum caesarie natus,” as the Calendar of Cashel explains that name.
This designation betrayed Usher and others into error when they style our saint /i/ius
Monghich, ‘‘the son of Mongach.” The genealogy of St. Fachtna is thus accu-
rately given in the ‘‘ Sanctilogium Genealogicum” :—“ Fachtna, the son of Maon-
aigh, the son of Cairill, the son of Fiachna, &c., descended from Lughad, son of
Ith,” and from the genealogical tables, we should conclude that the holy Bishop
Brandubh, whose feast is kept on the 3rd of June, and Saints Casan and Cailcin,
were brothers of our saint. The O’Driscolls. in whose territory Ross was founded,
belonged to the same race, and made it one of their tribe-duties to enrich the monas-
tery and church of their patron saint with lands and other endowments. After St.
Fachnan twenty-seven bishops of his tribe ruled the See of Ross, as is thus ex-
pressed in the ancient quatrain preserved in the Book of Lecan :—

“ Seven and twenty bishops nobly
Occupied Ross of the truly fertile lands,
From Fachtna the melodious, the renowned,
To the well-ordered Episcopate of Dongalach.”

The names of these bishops are not mentioned in our annals, only their number
is recorded, and their jurisdiction, which was co-extensive with the territory of
Corcalaidhe. This example should serve as a warning to the student of our Eccle-
siastical History not to infer from the silence of our annals in regard to other
districts, either that there was no regular succession of bishops or that there were
no fixed boundaries for the ancient Sees of the Irish Church.

St. Fachtna is commemorated in all our ancient Martyrologies on the 14th of
August. The entry in the Martyrology of Donegal on 14th August seems, how-
ever, at first sight to exclude St. Fachtna from the See of Ross. The whole
entry for that day is as follows :—‘‘Fachtna, Bishop and Abbot of Dairinis
Maelanfaidh, in Hy-Cennselach ; forty-six years was his age, and he was of the
race of Lughaidh. son of Ith, according to the Seanchus : Echlech, Cuimmen, and
Caemhan, three sons of Daighre : Brocadh : Dinil.”—(Martyr. of Donegal, page
219.) Thus all mention is omitted of Rossailithir. There is, however, some
confusion in this entry, owing, probably, to a transposition of names. We are,
happily, able to detect the error by the corresponding entry in the Martyrology of
Tallaght, as preserved in the Roman fragment of the Book of. Leinster, which is
as follows :—‘‘ XIX. KalendasSeptembris. Fachtna mac Mongano Ros Ailithir :
Dinil Macintsair : Mac-intsaeir, Episcopus et Abbas Darinsi Maelianfaid : Broccain
Mac Lugdach : Cummini: Coemain: Aicclig.” Thus, it was not St. Fachtna

