--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-191.png ---
County of Derry. 165

Inquisition 10th November, 1603, found that the ancient in-
habitants of O’Cahane’s country granted to St. Columb and
his successors, Ardmagiligan, containing twelve quarters of
land ; where two chapels, now destroyed, were erected ; the
said lands paying the annual rent of 40s. sterling to the bishop
of Derry, and the said twelve quarters were only of the annual
value of 135. 4a.*«

Abbey of Canons Regular; St. Columb, of noble extraction,
was born at Gartan, in the county of Donegall, in the year

“* Chief Rem.

Treland at that time. The king offered the fort to Columcille, but he refused it
on account of the command of Mobi (Clarainech of Glasnevin). As Columbcille,
however, came out of the fort, he met two of the religious of Mobi, bringing to him
Mobi’s girdle, with his consent that Columcille should accept a grant of territory,
Mobi having died. Columcille then settled in the fort of Aedh, and founded a
church there, and wrought many miracles in it.” The same narrative is substantially
repeated in the Liber Hymnorum, part second, and in the Irish Life by
O'Donell. These authorities must more than counterbalance the objections made
by Lanigan, Ec. Hist. I1., pag. 122, and Ordnance Memoir, Londonderry, pag. 18.
The original small church erected by St. Columcille was called in later times the
Dubh-regias, or ‘Cella Nigra,” to distinguish it from the 7emple-mor, or great ca-
thedral, erected under his invocation. Tighernach preserves an ancient quatrain, in
which St. Columba is said to have passed three years in silent retreat within the
enclosure of this church. Derry seems to have been particularly loved by the
Saint, even when he was engaged in his Apostolical career among the Picts. There
is a very ancient Irish poem, written in the name of Saint Columba, in which he thus
eulogises this abode of pict . It is given in full, together with the original text, in
Reeve’s Adamnan, page 285, seqq. :—

“The reason I love Derry is,
For its quietness, for its purity,
And for its crowds of white angels,
From the one end to the other.

‘‘ The reason why I love Derry is,
For its quietness, for its purity,
Crowded full of Heaven’s angels.
Is every leaf of the oaks of Derry.

““My Derry, my little oak grove,
My dwelling, and my little cell ;
O eternal God! in Heaven above,
Woe be to him who violates it.”

The prophecy contained in these last lines, that Divine punishment should fall on
those who would violate the monastery of Derry was more than once fulfilled in
aftertimes. Thus, in 1195. when a body of the Norman invaders plundered the abbey,
they were immediately after intercepted and cut off at Armagh ; and two years
later, when a large body of the same troops again devastated Derry and desecrated
its churches, they were defeated with great slaughter in the adjoining parish of
Faughanvale. To pass over other instances, when Derry became the centre of the
English military operations in 1596, the cathedral was converted into an arsenal ;
but on the 24th of April the gunpowder blew up, bringing destruction on many of
the garrison, and utterly dismantling the fortifications of the town, so that it had
to be immediately abandoned by the army. For further Panes regarding this
venerable See, we may refer to the ‘‘ Ordnance Survey of the County of London.
derry, 1837,” vol. I. ; and Dr. Reeves’ ‘‘Cotton’s Visitation of the Diocese of
Derry,” published for the I.A.S. in 1850.

