--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-297.png ---
County of Down. 261

A.D. 1210. William was prior, for we find him a subscribing
witness to Sir John’s charter to the Black Abbey,* and the
Knight died some time before this year.

1293. The prior William Rufus being deposed, a license
was granted, dated April the 6th, to proceed to elect in his
room.

1380. John was prior before this year.™
* Mon, Angl., vol. 2, p. 1019. 'Pryn, vol. 3, p. 354. ™ King, p. 24.

(10 Ed. IIT.) preserved in the Tower of London, recites charters of this house from
John de Courcy, Richard de Burgo, Stephen de Petraponte, Nicholas of Trym,
William FitzAllen, and William de Mandeville.

John de Courcy’s charter runs thus :—‘‘ To God, to St. Mary and St. John, and
St. Nicholas and to St. Clement, and to the friars who dwell in the hospital out-
side the City of Down.” The custody of the hospital, or leper-house of St.
Nicholas, seems to have been committed to the friars of St. John’s. A Patent
Roll (10 Rich. II.) of the date of 1387 records a grant from the Crown of the
custody of the hospital to Brother Thomas Cuthbert. This “ Brother Thomas
Cuthbert, master of the house of St. John of the English of Down,” was appointed,
in 1390, deputy to Thomas de Clifford in all his offices, and became Chancellor and
Treasurer of the Liberties of Ulster. A Patent Roll (3 Henry IV.) recites a peti-
tion of “ Thomas, Prior of the house of St. John of the English, near the City of
Down, in Ulster,” in which he states that he and his predecessors, since the con-
quest of Ireland, had been seized in right of their monastery by the gift of Johnde

ourcy of a certain custom called ‘‘Jes sise bolles’—namely, of two measures
(lagenze) of ale from every brewing (pandoxicatio) of ale in the City of Down ; and
that by a gift of Walter de Burgo, late Earl of Ulster, they had been seized of a
church in a certain island called the island of St. John of Down, but
that the custom and the church had passed into the possession of the late Karl of
Ulster, while the prior, both on account of his own poverty and of the suddenness
of the death of the earl, had been unable to recover them. The prior succeeded in
establishing his claim to both the custom and the church. This insular cyurch
seems to have been the Chapel of St. Mary Magdalen, which stood in the town-
land of Ringreagh, where traces of a burial-ground have been observed at a spot
about one hundred yards distant from the new road between Downpatrick and
Ballydugan, ona hill which had formerly been an island. The Chapel of St.
Mary Magdalen was valued in the taxation of Pope Nicholas at 20s. ‘‘ The free
chapel of the Blessed Mary Magdalene,” vacant by the death of Stephen Trystry,
was conferred, A.D. 1449, upon Wm. M‘Connocha, It was conierred in 1487
upon Robert Ball, and in 1512 it was one of the churches annexed to the cathedral
by Tiberius, Bishop of Down and Connor. We learn from an Inquisition (3 Ed.
VI.) held A.D. 1550, that the Prior of St. Patrick's was seized of ‘a void piece of
land and the walls of an ancient Chapel of St. Mary Magdalen, of no value.” The
“* Terrier,” a document of the year 1615, says—“ Capella Sanctze Marie Magdalen
de Rinriath, it is the Archdeacon’s of Down, and he pays in proxies, 15.; in refec-
tions, 1s.; in synodals, 2s.” It seems strange that the townland of Ringreagh
(Rinn riach, the grey point), though situated in the heart of the parish of Down,
should be in the parish of Kilclief. This, however, can be accounted for by sup-
posing that its chapel, dedicated to St. Mary Magdalen, was attached to the hos-
pital or leper-house of St. Nicholas of Down, the custody of which, along with the

ospital or leper-house of St. Peter at Kilclief, was entrusted, A.D. 1415, to John
FitzRichard, chaplain, John Molyn, and W alter Sely, and the lands attached to it
would easily pass under the jurisdiction of the Protestant archdeacon when that
dignitary became possessed of the parish of Kilcleif. The insular position of Ring-
reagh renders it probable that it is the church in the Island of St. John of Down
w]hich was the subject of the petition of Prior Thomas, to which reference has
aready been made, and the same igsular position would have recommended its
suitability for a leper-house.

