--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-282.png ---
250 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

grants them every tenth cow and tenth animal on all his farms,
excepting in the Ardes, for the health of the souls of all who
had contributed to advise or assist him in the conquest of
Ulster: Witness, Jordan de Courcey, his brother.

The bishop Malachy granted to the abbey Lochmonne,
Messesarech, Ferrochen, Ballinscanlan, Arthgothin, Balin-
rothan, Telagnocrossi, Balienbrethnaghe, Belgach, Delen,

(the founder of Errigalkeeroge, in the County of Tyrone), and the Canoin Phatruic
(the Book of Armagh), besides a bell called the Ceolan an Tighearna, They
afterwards, however, set the bishops at liberty, and restored the Canoin Phatruic
(the Book of Armagh) and the bell, but they killed all the inferior clergy, and
kept the other noble relics, which are still in the hands of the English.” De
Courcy was extremely superstitious, and thought that he was designated in a
prophecy, said to have been delivered by Ambrosius Merlin, of Caermarthen, who
ived in the 5th century, which declared that ‘‘a white knight, sitting on a white
horse, and bearing birds on his shield, would be the first that, with force of arms,
would enter and invade Ulster.” He likewise held, it is said, the prophecies
attributed to St. Columbkille in such veneration that he slept with the book con-
cealed under his pillow, because there was one of those prophecies which foretold
that a certain pauper and beggar, and fugitive from another country, would come
to Down with a small army and obtain possession of the town, and that such would
be the slaughter of the citizens that the enemy would wade up to their knees in
their blood.

John de Courcy founded the Cathedral, which was then called the Church of the
Most Blessed Trinity, possessed by a prior and convent of secular canons, who
were the chapter of the diocese. “He caused the church to be called the Church of
St. Patrick, and he determined to substitute Benedictines instead of the secular
canons. For this purpose he obtained from the Benedictine Abbey of St. Werburg,
at Chester, a prior and a body of monks. for which he made to that abbey a grant
of lands, the record of which, in the Registry of St. Werburg’s, ran thuss—“John
de Courcy has given to the Church of St. Werburga, at Chester, Hurmach along
with ten carucates of land beneath 7hewet of Chenelfernan in perpetual alms . . .
in order that the Abbot of Chester may select from his house a prior and community,
to erect an abbacy of his Order in the Church of St. Patrick of Down; so that the
aforesaid Church of Down remain free from every subjection to the Church of
Chester, in consideration of the same forementioned ten carucates. Witness,
Malachy, Bishop of Down, &c.” In consequence of this, as we are informed by an
annalist of Chester, whose entry has been preserved by Ussher—‘‘ In the year 1183
a certain monk, named William de Etleshale, went from Chester into Hulvester
(Ulster) to Down, and he received the priory of the Church of St. Patrick from
Malachy, Bishop of Down, and Lord John de Courci.” Shortly after this, De
Courcy induced or compelled the bishop to make the following grant, which is
preserved in a Patent Roll, 42 Edward 11I.:—‘ Know all men present and to -
come, that I, Malachy, Bishop of Down, have granted, for the honour of God and
of holy religion, the Church of St. Patrick of Down, with all its rights, for the use
of the prior and the Black Monks, of whom I, the Bishop, shall be the guardian
and Abbot, as is the case in the Church of Wynton or Coventry. Wherefore, I
have granted and confirmed to them and to their successors the towns belonging to
the Church, viz., &c.” Then follow the names of forty-seven townlands and three
rectories, most, or perhaps the whole of these vast possessions, was the property of
the Prior and Convent at the period of the suppression. After enumerating the
townlands and rectories, the document concludes:—‘* Moreover, for the honour and
reverence of my episcopal dignity, I have retained in my hands the one-half of the
oblations on these five festivals of the year, and no others, namely, on the
Nativity of the Lord. on the Purification of the Holy Mary, on the festival of St.
Patrick, at Easter and Penticost. Of this grant these are the witnesses. L, Arch-
bishop of Dublin, T. Armagh, and many others.” There is preserved among the
papers formerly belonging to Sir James Ware, a copy ofan ancient roll of the four-

