--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-092.png ---
72 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

Killisertdenyn, six cartrons of land, annual value 6s.; Kil-
more, six cartrons of land, annual value 6s.; Knockabridy,
half a cartron of land, annual value 6¢.; Largan, two cartrons
of land, annual value 2s.; Larganboye, half a cartron of land,
annual value 6d. ; Larra, three cartrons of land, annual value
3s.; Lawye, two cartrons and three quarters of land, annual
value 2s. 9d. ; Magheriehullagh, three cartrons of land, annual
value 3s.; Markil, two cartrons of land, annual value 2s.:
Moybolge, three cartrons of land, annual value 3s. ; Monter-
connaght, half a cartron of land, annual value 6¢.; Rahaura,
one cartron of land, annual value 12d.; Ramtavin, two
cartrons of land, annual value 2s.; Seaneroe, one cartron of
land, annual value 12¢.; Templedowa, one cartron of land,
annual value 12d.; Templeport, four cartrons of land, annual
value 4s.; Tomregin, six cartrons of land, annual value 6s.;
Tonaghmore, near Kilmore, three cartrons of land, annual
value 3s.; Urney, three cartrons of land, annual value 35.

COUNTY OF CLARE.

Beagh; in the barony of Burren; there was a monastery
here of the third order of Franciscan Friars” The Abbey of
Beagh and the townland of Abbey Beaghan are mentioned in
the records.

Ceannindis, or Keannindse, is the name of a hill in Dal-
cassia, now the county of Clare.* St. Comgall, who was
abbot of Gleanussen, in the King’s County, founded a church
here; he died before the year 569.>

Clare? on the river Fergus, where it falls into the river
Shannon, in the barony of Islands.

An abbey was founded near to this town, under the invo-
cation of St. Peter and St. Paul, for canons regular following
the rule of St. Augustin, by Donald O’Brien the Great, King
of Limerick; he appointed Donatus abbot, and richly en-

*War. mon. *Mss. notes on Vard. Act. SS. p. 417.

' Beagh, or Beatha. This abbey was situated in the present townland of Beatha,
which lies north of the Abbey of Corcumroe, in the barony of Burren, and bounded
on the other side by the bay of Kinvara.

* Clare abbey was situated midway between the towns of Ennis and Clare. The

ruins, still in pretty good preservation, may be seen within a few perches of the
Ennis railway station.

