--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-279.png ---
County of Down. 247

1183. The secular canons were turned out of this abbey by
Sir John de Courcey, who placed therein monks of the order
of St. Benedict, from the abbey of St. Werburgh in Chester,
dedicating it at the same time to St. Patrick, it being before
under the invocation of the Holy Trinity ;4 and William de
Etleshall, a monk of Chester, was made the first prior.®

In several different charters Sir John makes them various
grants. In one, for the health of the souls of his father and

4 Usher. War, Mon. and Annal. © Id.

Down, which appears to have been hereditary in the families of O’Cathusaich
(which might be modernised into O'Casey, or perhaps O’Cusack) and O’Cairill
(which would now be O’Carrill, or perhaps Carvill). Some of the erenachs of
Down are not called by those sirnames, though it is probable that they belonged
to those privileged families. The genealogical work of Duald MacFirbis gives
the origin of the O’Cairills “ Aodh Roin (King of Ulidia, slain A.D. 732), had five
sons—viz., Fiacha, a guo Clann Fiachaidh at Dun-da-leathglas. - «+ This
Fiachna (King of Ulidia, died A.D. 785) had six sons—viz., Cairioll, son of Fiachna
(King of Ulidia, slain A.D. 815), from whom are the O’Cairill in Dun-da-lethglas.”
The same work, in another place, says that a descendant of Fiachna “ was killed
by the O'Creichim in Dundalethglas, by which the quarter of Dun was forfeited by
them for ever to the Clann Fiachaidh.”

A.D. 992—“ Macleighin, son of Dunghalan, erenach of Dun-Leathglas,” and
“Dunchadh, Lector of Dun,” died. Dunchadh seems to have been a professor in
the University or College of Down. Keating, speaking of the incursion of the
Danes at the year 837, says :—‘‘ There were, moreover, till this time four prin-
cipal schools in Treland—viz., a school at Armagh, a school at Cashel, a school
at Dundaleathglas, and a school at Lismore.”

A.D. 1005—* Madadhan, son of Domhnall. King of Ulidia, was killed by the
Tore, #.e., Dubhtuine, in the middle of Dun Leathglas, in violation of the Saints of
Treland. Dubhtuine, #.¢, the Torc, King of Ulidia, was slain, through miracles
of God and Patrick, by Muireadhac, son of Madadhan, in revenge for his father.”
«The Annals of Ulster” add that Madadhan was slain ‘in the Church of Brigid,
in the middle of Down.” The murderer is called the ‘‘Tore” (the boar)—from him
is named probably the townland of Dunturk, in the civil parish of Loughinisland.
We cannot doubt that he received this epithet from his cruelty and ferocity, which
his son seems to have inherited from him, as the following entry shows :—

A.D. 1009—‘‘Scannlan O’Dunghalain, abbot of Dun-Leathglas, was blinded.”
The “ Annals of Ulster” add that he was ‘‘ forced from his fortress and carried
away, and his eyes put out at Finavar by Niall, son of Dubhtuine.” The place
where the oxen were caught, which conveyed the body of St. Patrick to Down-
patrick, is called by Colgan ‘‘Finnauar,” but in the “Book of Armagh” it is
named ‘‘Findubrec.” It is obviously Finabrogue, in the neighbourhood of Down-
patrick. Niall suffered a just punishment for his crime ; he was deposed in the
year 1011, and killed in battle in the year 1015.
® A.D. 1015—“Cernach, son of Cathusagh, erenach of Dunleathglas, died.”
“* Dun-da-lethglas_was totally burned with its Damhliag and Cloictheach.” The
** Daimhliag,” which is the Irish word for a stone church, was the Cathedral, and
it was probably the same building at the erection of which flames are said to have
burst forth out of the foundations, as is told in the legend preserved in the “ Book
of Armagh.” The “ Cloichtheach” was the steeple or Round Tower, which stood
near the south-east angle of the cathedral, on a portion of what is now the
grayelled area. It is thus described in A Tour through Jreand in 1779 :—“ No
ancient monument remains in the old abbey, but here is a round tower which
stands about forty feet from the old cathedral, is sixty-six feet high, the thickness
of the walls three feet, and the diameter on the inside eight feet. On the west
side of it is an irregular gap, about ten feet from the top, near a third of the whole
circumference being broken off by the injury of time; the entrance into it is two


