--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-111.png ---
County of Clare. gI

way of ornament; there are apartments on three sides of it
the refectory, the dormitory, and another grand room to the
north of the chancel, with a vaulted room under them all; to
the north of the large room is a closet, which leads through
a private way to a very strong round tower, the walls of
which are near ten feet thick. In the front of the monastery
isa building, which seems to have been an apartment for
strangers, and to the south-west are two other buildings.”

Quin ; inquisition 24th April, 4th King James, finds that
the half of a quarter of land called Keave, containing sixteen
acres, and lying on the west side of the river and jabbey of
Quin, was parcel of the demesne of the said abbey, and a mill
in the town of Quin, with the water-course, was also a parcel
thereof; the whole of the annual value of 3s. besides reprises,

Rossbeenchoir;** near the western ocean; St. Cocca, nurse
to St. Kieran, was abbess of a nunnery here,‘ which is now
wholly unknown. .

Shraduffe,* or Templedisert: on the 12th of March, 1611, the
site of this abbey, and the possessions thereunto belonging,

tAct, SS. p. 461.

The “Annals of the Four Masters” notice this battle at the year 1278 in the fol-
lowing words :—" The victory of Cuinche (Quin) was gained by Donough, son of
Brian Roe and the other sons of O’Brien over the Earl of Clare. They bumed
the church of Cuincke over the heads of his people, and caused an indescribable
destruction of them, both by buming and killing;” and the editor adds (foot note n)
«The church here referred to, was an ancient Irish one, dedicated to St. Finghin.
The great abbey of this place was not erected till the year 1402, or, according to
Ware, till 1433. See Harris's edition of ‘ Ware’s Antiquities,’ p. 280.”

34 The “Annals of Innisfallen” notice this monastery as follows :—A.D, 500,
the monastery of Rosbeanchair, in the county of Clare, was founded by St. Con-
chadh. The same year a monastery was founded at /nés/ua, in the lower Shan-
non, in the county of Clare, by St. Caimin.”

3A visit to the spot would have supplied abundant evidence of the former existence
of the religious house, concerning which the author had such scanty information.

Templedisert, or the church of Dysert, is situated in the parish of Dysert (to which
it gives name), in the barony of Inchiquin, about five miles north-west from the town
of Ennis, on the road to Corofin. The ecclesiastical remains of this place consist of
a beautiful old church or monastery in ruins ; the doorway of this ruin has been
considered one of the best specimens of monastic architecture in Ireland, and stands
unshaken to the present day. It also contains the remains of a round tower
between thirty-five and forty feet high, and a large cross of hewn stone bearing the
effigy of the Patron Saint of the parish, namely, St. Monawl, whose altar of sculp-
tured stone is still preserved at this ruin, and whose name and festival are still ven-
erated in the parish of Dysert. An accurate sketch of the doorway of the ancient
venerable ruin may be seen in the ‘‘ Dublin Penny Journal,” 1832-3, page 148,
from the drawings of the late lamented Dr. Petrie.

In the Petrie Collection of Ecclesiastical Antiquities, in the Museum of the
Royal Irish Academy, may be seen part of the ancient crozierof St. Monawl in two

jieces, regarding which we find the following notice in Miss Petrie’s handwriting in
er father’s Catalogue of Antiquities :— No. 913-914. Crozier of St. Nael or Mona-
lach, patron Saint of Dysert O’Dea ; it had been preserved in the church until pur-
by my father from an old woman who belonged to the neighbourhood of Dysert
O’Dea, and who belonged to the family of the Zrrenachs or hereditary keepers.”

