--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-254.png ---
222 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

601. St. Comgall being worn out with extreme old age,
and the cares of his monastery, which he had superintended
fifty years and upwards, surrendered up his soul in his goth
year on the 1oth of May, on which day his feast is observed.*
He was succeeded by St. Finnchuo, who died the 25th of
November, on which day his feast is also celebrated ; this
abbot was remarkable for his austerities.!

605. Died the abbot St. Beogna; his feast is observed on
the 22nd of August&

St. Sillan, the son of Comyn, principal master and rector
of the schools of Bangor, succeeded him; and died on the
28th of February following." .

St. Cumian was abbot about the beginning of this century,!
and his festival is observed on the 17th of September.*

¢ Usher, Act. SS., p. 424. Calendar. * Fleming, p. 314. © Act. SS. p., 424.
™ Jd, and M'‘Geogh. ‘ Act. SS., p. $9. * Fleming, p. 314.

from the voice of angels, the psalmody of the celestial choir.” This legend may
have suggested the tanciful origin of the name. To it is to be attributed the name,
“« The Vale of Angels,” which continued to be used as an a/as for Bangor to its
dissolution, and even occurs as such in the patent under which its present owner
possesses it. .

The illustrious founder, St. Comgall, was born at Magheramourne, a district on
the coast of the county of Antrim, near Larne ; his father’s name was Sedna, and
his mother’s Briga. He was of a distinguished family of the Kingdom of Dal-
Araidhe (Dalaray), which then comprehended the northern half of the county of
Antrim, and which had received its name from its ancestor Fiacha Araidhe. It issaid
that his birth and future sanctity had been foretold both by St. Patrick and St.
MacNessa, the patron saint of Connor. He was bom, according to Tighernach,
in the year 517 ; but other accounts place his birth somewhat earlier. Jocelin,
and others after him, have translated his name into the words ‘‘ Beautiful pledge,”
but his first great disciple, St. Columbanus, considered Faustus, prosperous, as the
equivalent for his Celtic name. After having been instructed in the various
branches of learning he set out from his own country for the purpose of improving
himself in spiritual knowledge, and placed himself under St. Fintan, who then pre-
sided over the great religious establishment of Clonenagh, near Mountrath, in the
Queen's County. After he remained several years under St. Fintan, he was advised
by that saint to return to his own country, and to form there some religious estab-
lishment. On his return to Dalaradia, Comgall, it is said, went to Clonmac-
noise, where he was ordained priest by a Bishop Lugidius. Dr. Lanigan suspects
that Clonmacnoise is written by mistake for Connor, where there resided a per-
sonal friend of our saint, a bishop named Lugadius. St. Comgall intended to
spend the remainder of his days in Britain, but he was induced by Lugadius, and
other eminent men, to remain in his own country. _ He then, about the year 559,
founded the monastery of Bangor. The number of his followers soon became so
great, that it was necessary to establish various monasteries and cells, in which,
taken altogether, it was computed there were 3,000 monks under his rule. Among
them was Cormack, King of South Munster, who, in his old age, retired to Ban-
gor, and there spent the remainder of his days.

St. Bernard, in his life of St. Malachy, speaking of Bangor, says :—‘‘ There
had existed in this place, under the founder Comgellus, a most noble institution,
inhabited by many thousands of monks, the head of many monasteries, a place
truly sanctified, and so fruitful in saints, which brought forth fruit so abundantly
to God, that one of the sons of that holy congregation, Luanus by name, had
himself alone founded one hundred monasteries, which I mention for this reason,
that the reader may, from this single instance, form a conception of the number to
which the remainder of the community amounted. In short, so. widely had its

