--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-161.png ---
County of Cork. 135

Muskerry. St. Carthagmochuda built a monastery here
about the close of the 6th century, and placed therein the
three brothers, St. Gobban, St. Stephen, and St. Lafren, with
the bishop St. Domangen, and twelve others of his disciples ;
but they did not continue here, for we find that St. Doman-
gen was honoured in Tuaimmuscraighe.* This place is now
unknown.

Kilbeacan ,; on the north side of Mount Crotte, in Muscry-
ciure, and Keating says, it bears the same name at this day.
St. Abban, who died at a great age A.D. 650, built an

extensive monastery here, and placed over it St. Beacan, altas
Mobecoc.”

Kilchuilinn,® is supposed to be in the barony of Bantry ;
* Act. SS. p. 631. *Lid., p. 615, 622, 751.

land of Cuircne afflicted with various diseases, so that he was deaf, dumb, and
blind; and Mochuada came to where he was, and the King and his friends prayed
him to cure him. Mochuada prayed to God for him, and he put the sign of the
cross on his eyes, and on his ears, and on his mouth, and he was cured of all
diseases and blemishes. And Cathal gave extensive lands to God, and to
Mochuada for ever, namely—Cathal Island. and Rossbeg, and Rossmore, and
Pick Island, now Spike Island. And Mochuada sent holy brothers to build a
church in Rossbeg in honour of God. And Mochuada himself commenced
building a monastery in 7k /sland, and he remained a full year in it. Mochuada
then placed three of his disciples, namely—the three sons of Nascann, 4.¢., Bisho
Goban, and Sraphan the priest, and Laisren the saint, in these churches; and it
was the holy bishop of Ardomain that gave holy orders to those three persons, in
the presence of Mochuada, and it is he that was appointed to direct and to preserve
them in the way of righteousness, and he left two score more of his brethren in the
monastery of Pick /sland, in place of himself. And Mochuada then returned to
Rahen; and that Island which we have mentioned. #.e., Pick /sland, is a most holy
place, and most pious people reside in it perpetually.—O’ Curry MS., C.U.1.

36 St, Cannera was the holy virgin commemorated by Moore in the following lines
of his song of Saint Senanus and the Lady.

ST, SENANUS.

**Oh! haste and leave this sacred Isle,
Unholy bark, ere morning smile ;
For onthy deck, though dark it be,

A female form I see ;

And I have sworn this sainted sod

Shall ne’er by woman’s feet be trod.”
THE LADY.

“‘Oh! Father, send not hence my bark,
Through wintry winds and billows dark ;
I come with humble heart to share
Thy morn and evening prayer ;

Nor mine the feet, Oh! holy Saint,
The brightness of thy sod to taint.”

The legend of St. Cannera’s visit to /#is-Cathaigh and her interview. with St.
Senanus 1s thus preserved in the Irish lives of St. Senanus :-—

“ The pious Cannera, a virgin saint, of Beantraige (Bantry), in the south-west of
Erin, who established a Disert in her own country. A certain night after vespers,
as she was at her prayers, she saw all the churches of Ireland, and a tower
of fire rising out of every one of them up to heaven. The fire which rose out

