--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-148.png ---
122 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

St. Mary of the Island," was founded in the year 1229"
Philip de Barry, who arrived here to assist Robert Fitz-
Stephen, his uncle, in his conquests in this country, was a
rincipal benefactor to these friars, and his equestrian statue
in brass was formerly in this church?

A.D. 1333. 13th January, 8th King Edward III, a liberate
issued for the payment of one year’s annual pension to the
Dominican friars of Cork, Drogheda, Dublin, Waterford, and
Limerick.?

1340. John le Blound was prior.4

™Bourke. "Ann. de Trim. King, p.87. °War. Mon. ¥King, p, 87. Id. p.90.

This house was founded for friars-preachers, or Dominicans, by Philip de
Barry, a Welsh knight, ancestor of the noble family of Barrymore, in the county
of Cork. A bronze equestrian statue of the founder was preserved in the ch
by the community, as a monument of pious gratitude, until the suppression of the
convent under Henry VIII. The convent was dedicated to the Blessed Virgin;
and from its insular site—being built on one of the it marshes of “ the five-isled
city”—was called “ St. Mary's of the Island.” The church attached to the con-
vent is noticed in the history of the order as having been magnificent—‘‘ Magnifica
Ecclesia.” Soon after its erection, David MacKelly, dean of Cashel, took the
habit of a Dominican in this house ; in 1237 he was consecrated bishop of Cloyne;
next year, being succeeded in the chair of St. Colman by a brother Dominican,
Allan O’Sullivan, he was translated to the Metropolitan see of Cashel. Arch-
bishop David introduced into the arch-diocese an affiliation of friars-preachers from
Cork, and built for his brethren a beautiful church and abbey, at a short distance
from his own cathedral, on the rock of Cashel. His name is celebrated in the
works of many foreign and domestic writers. In 1245 he assisted at the first
general council at Lyons, to the acts of which his name is subscribed. .

A charter, confirmed by assent of King Edward II., was granted, in 1317, by
Sir Roger de Mortimer and his council in favour of the Dominican community, by
which the ward or custody of the gate of the lately-erected city walls, nearest of the
abbey of St. Mary’s, should be committed to the mayor, bailiffs, and other trusty
men, and free passage to and from the city should be given to the friars, and, for
their sake, to other good citizens.

Edmund Mortimer, Earl of March and Ulster, father of the Heir- Presumptive to
the crown of England, and Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, when he came to Cork, took
up his viceregal residence in the Dominican convent, He died in that house on
St. Stephen's day, 1381, and, as is sup] , was buried in St. Mary’s Isle.

A friar of the order of Preachers from Cork, and thence called Fr. Joannes
Coreagiensis, was Archbishop of Cologne in 1461.—({See Supplement of Hib.
Dom., page 866.)

The Convent of Cork, with the houses of the Dominicans in Youghal, Limerick,
and Coleraine, were in 1509, erected into ‘‘a congregation of strict observance,”
under the direction of a Vicar-General of the Order, which congregation was
solemnly spproved in the general chapter in Rome, A.D. 1518. A few years
later all the Dominican communities of Ireland, inside and outside the Pade, being
restored to discipline, and united in spirit, were formed into a distinct Province of
the Order, to be governed by an Irish Provincial, freely chosen in chapter.

The monastery of the Island at Cork, with all its appurtenances, lands, water
mills, salmon weirs, fishing pools, &c., was confiscated to the Crown in 1 544»
and sold to a person named William Boureman, at a head rent of six shillings
and nine-pence a year! The Friars, nevertheless, maintained possession for a
long time afterwards, and though often obliged to disguise and hide themselves,
they never abandoned the hope of regaining their ancient Convent, in which,
at intervals, during “ the troublesome times,” they contrived to live in community
until the reign of William III.

In the reign of Queen Elizabeth, Matthew Sheyne, Protestant Bishop of Cork,

