--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-250.png ---
218 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

There was an abbey here of which St. Ernan, the son of
Colman, was abbot about the year 650."

Tully [in the map], Tudlyaughnish [in the Visitation Book];
near Loughswilley, in the barony of Kilmacrenan. St Columb

“8 Act. SS., p. 17. Tr. Th., p. 490.

arrived on the top of a high mountain, from which the island was seen out in the
ocean, a discussion arose between himself and his companions as to who should
purify the island and become its patron. At last it was decided that each should
throw his staff in the direction of Torry, and that he whose staff came closest to
the island should bless and possess it. The staff of St. Columba distanced the
others by miles, it reached even the island itself, and the Saint having obtained the
permission of the chieftain, Ailild, entcred and erected a magnificent church and
monastery there. Being obliged soon after to be elsewhere, he committed the
government of the monastery to St. Eunan, one of his disciples, and left him strict
injunctions to allow no dog into the island. This monastery continued to flourish
through a long lapse of ages down, till Queen Elizabeth's governor of Connaught,
the cruel Bingham, made a descent upon the place and destroyed everything that he
could not carry away with him. A round tower, called the Clog-teach—‘‘the Bell-
House”—still stands here, wanting a portion of the roof, and the foundations of a
series of seven little churches or cells can still be traced with the aid of the tradi-
tions of the place. In a lonely corner of the island there is a little mound from
which a quantity of the earth has been excavated, called the ‘‘Nun’s Grave,” about
which :he poor islanders have a beautiful tradition. Long, long ago, after a great
storm, it appears, the body of a lady was found high up upon the beach, near the spot
where the grave now is. The wild waves, in carrying it thither, must have dragged it
over the pointed rocks, which form a barrier round the shore, and still it lay there
undisfigured and untouched by the rude elements, which crush the strongest timbers,
and wear the hardest rock. ‘Ihe face was pale, but without a scratch; the eyes
were closed as if in calm sleep ; the hands were clasped in the attitude of prayer;
and the dress retained the same graceful folds that it had when the person lived.
To the simple people the dress was new—it was the habit of a nun, with the
leathern girdle round the waist, from which the beads were suspended—the air
was laden with the sweetest perfume, and gleams of light shot out at inter-
vals and illumined the pale face. Intelligence of the strange occurrence soon reached
the inhabitants, and the whole population rushed to the spot. Awe and astonish-
ment seized the spectators, but not one of them ventured to touch the body,
for though they had never seen the habit with which it was clothed, they had
a notion that there was something sacred about it. A discussion arose as to how
they should act, but all was doubt and uncertainty, until one of them, venerable for
his years and virtues, and of high repute in the island, invited them to fall on their
knees and to pray to God to direct them in their difficulty. The crowd obeyed on
the instant, and they bent low in prayer. Presently a supernatural voice was
heard announcing to them the fact that the body lying there was that of a holy nun,
and telling them to bury it just as it was, with great respect and veneration, under
the green turf close to where it lay. Accordingly, they opened a grave, laid the
body gently in it, then closed it, and having spent a short time in prayer, they re-
turned to their homes with great joy and deep gratitude to God for so great a
favour, From that time forward the grave became a great resort of the poor
islanders, who are still to be seen in large numbers praying at it, and begging the
intercession of the holy nun who sleeps there. The efficacy of her intercession
has been and is being always felt in every cottage in the island ; many a father of
a family and poor widow’s son has it rescued from a watery grave. Of
this, instances almost innumerable are related in Torry, and at the present moment
hardly a boat in the island is ever known to put out into the ‘‘ treacherous deep”
without having a handful of earth from the ‘‘ Nun's Grave ” carefully deposited in
the stern. The earth of the mound raised over the grave has been so much drawn
upon, that it has become law with the people now that no one should take more
than a small pinch of it at atime.

