--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-114.png ---
94 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

and of Roscommon, he was also both abbot and bishop of
Clonmacnois; and built the church and steeple of this
abbey.4

1002. Died the abbot Dungal, he was the son of Beoan.¢

1027. Brien Borombh, the famous monarch of Ireland,
repaired the steeple about this time!

1078. Died the abbot Cormac Hua Beain.®

1084. O’Ruark of Breffiny reduced this abbey to ashes,

4 Act. SS. p. 107, 360. ld. p. 257. ' Keating. Act, SS. p. 361.

is bounded on the west and north by the parish of Feakle ; on the east by the
parishes of Moyno and Ogonnello ; on the south by part of the latter and Kilno,
and on the west by the parish of Feakle.

“The name of this parish is written in all the ancient Irish authorities 7uaim
Greine, and explained in the ‘ Yellow Book of Lecan,’ and in the ‘ Lismore MS.’
as signifying the fmulus of Grian, the daughter of Bord na Binne, who was
drowned in Lough Greine. The same legend is vividly remembered in the country,
but horribly deformed. The lady Grian, who was also called Gille Greinne, or
Candor Solis, i. e. the Brightness of the Sun, was a far-famed beauty who flourished
here at a period unknown to chronology, but like Venus, she was of unnatural
origin, and when told of this she became sad and cheerless, and at once
determined on self-destruction. She cast herself into a lake in S/iabh Echtghe,
in which she was immediately drowned. When her fair body floated it was
carried by the stream flowing from this lake in a south-eastern direction and cast
up on the land upon the margin of a wood called by posterity from that circum-
stance Daire Greine, i. e. Roberetum Gryncae, where it was found by her friends,
who interred it at a place not far distant, and raised over it a ‘umulus,
to which they and posterity gave, and continue to give, the name of
Tuaim Greine, i. e.the tumulus of Grian. This is the local explanation of the
word, and it is as true as any other legend etymology and conjecture could invent
to account for it.

“ The only other explanation which could be offered, is to suppose that Zuaim
Greine signifies the mount of the sux, and that it received that appellation from a
colony of Heliolators or Grionalators formerly established in this wild district; unless
we suppose that it simply means sun-mount, i.e, the sunny hill, or human sepul-
ture, and this latter is Tikely to be as true as any other, as we have millions of nice
little names derived from ‘clear spring,’ or shady grove, or SUNNY HILL, so that
if we reject the explanation of the name 7uaim Greine preserved by written and
oral tradition, we must only invent a little etymological FABLE to account for it ina
new and /earned manner.

“A monastery was founded here at an early period by St. Cronan, who was vene-
rated there as the patron, and whose Coarbs the abbots of 7uatm Greine were
called; but no life of him has been published by Colgan, nor discovered by the
investigators of Irish hagiology employed on the Ordnance Survey of Ireland.

“According to the frish Calendar collected from various sources by the Four
Masters, his memory was celebrated on the 19th of October, under which his life is
certainly given in Colgan’s MSS., which were in Louvain about one hundred years
ago. Till the life of St. Cronan of Zuaim Greine be discovered, no chronological
calculation can be made of the time at which an ecclesiastical establishment was
first placed at Zuaim Greine.

**For the annals of Zain Greine, see Archdall’s “ Monasticon,” p. §5, copy in
the Royal Irish Academy, and ‘‘ Annals of the Four Masters,” at the years A.D.
735, 744, 747, 789, 1002, 1026, 1031, 1078, 1084, 1093, 1100, 1164, 1185, 1485.

“Colgan has published a passage relating to this place in his Acta SS. (under,
chapter 1. of the appendix to the life of St. Cormac, Bishop of Ath-7ruim), which
he gives as from the ‘ Annals of the Four Masters,” A.D. 964, but which is not to be
found in the copy published by Doctor O’Conor, nor in any copy to which we have


