--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-104.png ---
84 ; Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

with a quarter of land adjoining thereto ; which at the dissolu-
tion was granted to John King.

bAuditor Gen. Office.

St. Mainchin went around the cattle outside having St. Luchiigern’s staff (crozier)
in his hand, and carrying with him the Cuiteach Fuait (or bell) of St. MacCreiche,
which he is stated to have brought off the altar of St. Peter in Rome, thus taking
a formal possession of the spoils (in the name of the ecclesiastical heads of the then
kingdom of Corcomroe) and keeping the cattle, &c., in regular charge till they
reached Magh Aoi, in Crauchan in Connaught, where the king resided.

Having reached Magh Aoi, we are told that the druids of the king of Connaught
came out against the clerics to prove the superior power of their druidic arts, and
were defeated and subdued by S¢, AfacCreiche.

After this S¢. MacCreiche and the men of Corcomroe went up to the palace
(Dunn) of the king to request the surrender of their spoils, but the haughty king,
purning the intercession of the miserable old cleric St. MacCreiche (now eight score
and seven years old), refused to admit him into his presence, nor was the answer
he sent out favourable or complimentary, adds the tale.

St. MacCreiche, now feeble and weary, insulted and disheartened, returns into the
broad plains of AMagh Aoi to spend the night amongst the plundered spoils of Cor-
comroe on the open field, and soon he was seized with a violent fit of thirst. ‘‘ If it

leaseth God,” said he, ‘‘great as my thirst is now, may the king’s thirst be greater
fore morning, though abundant drinks are now in his house.” This was verified,
for soon the king became so afflicted with a fit of unnatural thirst that all the drinks
in his palace could give him no relief, and thus in the dead of night he asked
to be brought out to S¢. MacCreiche, where, for sake of one drink of water, he bowed
in obedience to him, and bound himself and all his race, and every king who should
succeed him in the sovereignty of Connaught, in perpetual allegiance to St.
MacCreiche and to his Comarés to the end of time, and promising that neither him-
self nor any future king of Connaught would ever again ask or demand the tributes
of Corcomroe, and with these conditions he surrendered the spoils of Corcomroe to
St. MacCreiche to be restored to their proper owners.

After this St. MacCreiche struck the ground with his staff (crozier) in presence
of the king, a beautiful spring of pure clear water burst forth on the spot, and the
king drank of it and was cured of his thirst, and this well is still known as St.
MacCreiche's holy well on the plain of Afagh Aoi, at Cruachan, in Connaught.

The states and people of Corcomroe now assembled to vote their thanks to St.
MacCreiche, and unanimously agreed to acclaim him spiritual head and chief of the
territory of Corcomroe, and bound themselves to pay a tribute to maintain himself
and his Comarbs to the end of time, and requested him to found a church with them
in order that they may remain under his protection and the protection of his Comard
and of his bell to the end of time. S¢, MacCreiche consented and established his
church in his native territory of Corcomroe.

The ruins of St. AfacCresche’s church. to which this legend refers, may be seen to
the present day in the churchyard of Kilmacrehy, in the parish of Kilmacrehy, in
the barony of Corcomroe, to which it gives name. This old ruin is situated about
four miles west from the town of Ennistymon, on the north side of Liscannor bay, on
the western coast of Clare. The style and architectural features of this old ruin indicate
its high antiquity, and several portions of arches and mouldings are yet to be seen,
some imbedded in the walls and others scattered through the burial grounds and used as
headstones over many of the graves. Here, too, was a holy well dedicated to St.
MacCreiche, much frequented of old, but now very rarely visited, owing probably to
the ter celebrity of St. Bridget's well, which is quite near and much resorted to
by the peasantry,

St. MacCreiche founded several churches in the county of Clare, but the only
one named after himself was the Ci// MacCrieche, or Cillmacrehy above mentioned.

He was founder of the church of Cil/-Mainchinne, i.e., St. Mainchin's church,
now Kilmanaheen, which gives name to the parish of Kilmanaheen. It wassituated
in the burial ground of Kilmanaheen, in the present townland of Newtown, now

