--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-157.png ---
County of Cork. 131

Fleming was elected, who paid his homage, as abbot of Fer-
moy, to John, bishop of Cloyne, for the lands of Kilconany
1480. The abbot Nicholas O’Henesa was made bishop
of Waterford in this year.”
26th June, 33rd Queen Elizabeth, a grant was made to Sir
Richard Greneville, Knt., and his heirs, of this monastery,

. ° 7 King, p. 359. * War, Bps., p. 536.

hannnaCarcrach. Hi Daerghala are its hereditary people, Maistre-Meic na gam-
hnaighe ; Daire Hi Diarmata, i.e. Hi‘ Diarmada and Hi Cochlain are its heredi-
tary occupiers. Dun Tulcha Cill Curnain ; Croch, out of which are Hi Dathail of
Croch. Ard Ceanannais and Dun ar aill are one Baile, and out of it are Hi
Faelain and Hi Uirisi. Cill Fadais the burial cemetery of that Tuath, and it was
Mac Con Gairbh, #.e. Mac Coemoc, that consecrated that church. Hi Maeil Bile
are its Comarbs. Hi Amhradha and Hi Labhra and Hi Eire are its hereditary
people, and the Hi Duibh, of Trochmael, were chiefs over them.

“«T have another Tuath yet to describe, #.¢. Madh O’Cathail, 7.c. Messignighe and
Carraigh Leme-Laeghaire. out of these are Hi Domh-naill, chiefs of Magh ; Cill
Cuile, out of which are Hi Fearghala ; Baile Hi Fiachain, out of which are Hi
Fiachin, Cluain Caisi] and Daire na Teide, the chief Baile of Hi Annadha. out of
which are Hi Annadha; Garran O’n-Gnima, out of which are Hi-Gnimh ; Cuil-Baile
Hi Finn, out of which are Hi Finn, Claen Uir is their burying place. The Comarb-
ship of that church is the hereditary privilege of the Hi Annadha, and Hi Cennagain
are its Mac Cleircach ; the Hi Brain from Clettigh are in this Trian, and the
Meic Cairtin from Baile Meig Cairtin, and they are of the people of Rathan, and
this Trian is the hereditary lordship of Hi Domhnaile (O’Donnell), and he is also
entitled to the other two Trians when they have not a chief of themselves,

“The third Trian of them which I have not described, #.¢. Magh Nale, with its
subdenominations, out of which are Hi gormain ; the Brugh and Flaithneim, out
of which are Hi Ardghala ; Tulach-Finnleithid, out of which are Hi Cuilein ;
Magh Lis an Ibhair, out of which are Hi Donnagain ; Baile Hi Mulghuala, out of
which are Hi Macilghnala. and out of it also are hi Macilmuala ; Cil O’n-Gerbhin-
nain, out of which are Hi n-Geibennain and Hi Cailte: Claenuir is the burial
place of those two [families] and of O n-Gormain ; and Rathan is the burial place
of all the other families of this Trian after them, and the Meic Finnen are the
Comarbs of Rathan. The other family names are Hi Crainchi, Hi Conaill, Hi
Conaic, Hi Brain Meic Coirtein, and O’Hardgala is the hereditary chief of this
Tuath.

“Hi Bece Abha, ée. Dun Cruadha, out of which are I Laeghuire ; the Rindi,
around the river, out of which are Hi Cairbre and Hi Cathail; Cill Laisre, at both
sides, out of which are Hi Cleirigh ; Moin Ainmneat both sides, out of which are Hi
Eoguin ; Athan Crainn, at both sides, out of which are Hi Buachalla ; Cill Cuain,
out of which are Hi Fiadhain [or Uan], and Hi Laeghaire are their chieftains.

“The other half of that Tuath is Hi Bece upper, #.e. Sonnach Gobann and
Cluain Lochluinn near Abha Bec east and west, out of which are Hi Gobunn ;
Baile Hi Grigin, on the same river, out of which are I grigin; Gleann Tuircin to
the west and east on the river ; Daire Hi Ceinneidigh, out of which are Hi Cein-
neidigh ; Ceall Ossain Luimneach Beg, extending west of Taedan, and from that
eastward to Lochluingi, with its other patronymics, O’Gobunn is hereditary
chief over them, and he is entitled to the other half of Ibh Bece when there is not
a chief of the Ui Laeghaire. Cill Commuir is the burial place of Hi Bece on
either side, and Hi Dathail are comarbs of that church, and Hi Cochlain are its
Mac Cleireachs.

“ Tuath O'Fiannaidh, from Baile Hi Gormain, west to the road in Druim Raite,
and to Ath na Ceall, and from Abhan mor to the limit of Magh Finne, and the
chief of that Tuath is Mag Fiannadhnighe, and its patronymics are Hi Etromain,
and Hi Annrathain, and Hi Fireidhin, and Hi Brain Fhinn, and Hi Dubhain. Cill
Cluaise is the burial place of that Tuath.

“ Tuath O’n-Duinnin, and its length is from the summit of Sliabh Cain to Each-

