--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-229.png ---
County of Donegall. 197

Kilbaron ;* on the bay of Donegall, in the barony of Tyre
hugh. St. Columb founded the church of Kilbharrind,* near
Easruadh. Barrind, who flourished about the year 590,” gave
his name to this church, and was bishop of it, and also of
Druimchulinn.* It is now a parish church in the diocess of
Raphoe.*

* Called also Kilbairrfhind and Kilbarrin.  % Usher. *Tr. Th., p. 458 and
495. * Liber Visit.

says, enclosed in a kind of frame or case which had never been*opened. Engraved
on it, with great artistic skill, was the crucifixion, the two Marys, St. John, and
another figure, and over it in silver were two other figures of the archangel
Michael, one on each side of our Lord, who was represented in the act of risi
from the tomb. There is a long inscription in Gothic or black letters, all of whieh
are effaced by constant polishing. except the words Mahon O'Meehan—the name,
probably, of the engraver. There are two large precious stones inserted, one on
each side of the crucifixion. and a brass chain suspended from one side of the bell.
The island is a great resort for pilgrims, who come here in large numbers during
the summer months to beg the intercession of St. Connell. The veneration for the
saint's memory is most striking. All over Boylagh, in the glens and mountains,
they pray to him in their difficulties, and in each returning season they come forth
in crowds, wending their way to Iniskeel to make the furris. The island is called
after St. Connell, for his paternal name was Cao#/, and it has given its name to the
parish, the most extensive in the diocese of Raphoe. The venerable ruin, and the
old graveyard in which it stands, are sadly neglected. This isa shame and a pity.
Let us hope that some effort will soon be made to save the ruin from utter des-
truction, and the old graveyard from being, what it is now, a preserve for sheep
and cattle.

13 Kilbaron.—This is the name of a locality about four or five miles north-west
of Ballyshannon. It possesses much antiquarian interest, for it has the remains
of the old castle or fortress of the O’Clerys, as well as those of the church or
monastery from which the parish derives its name. Let us first say a few words
of the church. Its foundation is attributed to St. Collum-Cille himself. Manus
O'Donnell, in his life of the saint, mentions the fact, and adds a long and
beautiful account of the circumstances which led him to establish it. St.
Barrann, whom he appointed to govern it, was a relative of his own and
a descendant of Conal-Gulban. He is commemorated in the Martyrology of
Donegal at 21st May. About a mile from the old church is all that is left of the
ancient fortress of the O'Clerys, a family renowned in Irish history for their skill
in science, try and other branches of literature. Two of the Four Masters were
members ‘of this illustrious family, and the fate of one of the two, Peregrine or
Cugory O'Clery, is thus given in the records of an Inquisition held at Lifford in
May, 1632, where it is stated of him—‘ that being a mere Irishman, and not of
English or British descent or surname, his lands were forfeited to the King.” It
was thus the profound scholar, and the last of the lords of Kilbarron castle, was
expelled from Vis heritage and forced to live on the charity of his friends. He
died in the year 1664, in the county of Mayo, where he had been enjoying an
humble shelter, and left a will behind him in which he bequeathed his books—the
only property he had—to his two sons. The following is an extract from this
interesting document “T bequeath the property most dear to me that ever I
possessed in this world, namely, my books, to my two sons Dermott and John.

t them copy them without injuring them, whatever may be necessary for their
Purpose, and let them be equally seen and used by the children of my brother
Carbry to instruct their children” The ruins of the castle of Kilbarron stand on
a cliff overhanging the sea. The student of Irish history will have melancholy re-
flections in wandering among them, but he will also have relief in the contemplation
of the magnificent view spreadeout before him. Onthe north he will have Donegal
bay, with its numerous inlets, and mountain barriers against the ocean ; and to the
south and west, the mountain ranges of northern Connaught.


