--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-268.png ---
236 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

The abbot also enjoyed a townland in the Isle of Man,
called Clenanoy, on condition that he should attend on the
king of that island at certain times!

A carucate of land in Ballyegan, and another carucate in
Corbally, parcel of the possessions of this abbey, and situate
in the country of Bryan Fertagh, were granted to Gerald Earl
of Kildare; see Lismullen, in county of Meath."

Franciscans ; the abbey of Bangor was so gone to ruin in
the year 1469, through the neglect of the abbot, that Pope
Paul II. commanded that the friars of the third Order of St.

1 King, p. 238." Aud. Gen.

It had gone so far to ruin in the year 1469, that Pope Paul II. commanded that
the Franciscans of the third order of St. Francis should immediately take posses-
sion of it, which was accordingly done, says Wadding, by Father Nicholas of that
order. How much Hangor was resuscitated under the disciples of St. Francis,
does not appear ; but at the dissolution we find it possessed by the Augustinians,
though it was then in a very impoverished and dilapidated state. According to an
inquisition held in the reign of James I., William O’Dornan, the abbot, held, in
the 32nd year of Henry VIII, 34 townlands, together with the tithes of the
rectory of Ballymahan, extending over three townlands.—The site of this church
is at present occupied by two gardens attached to Moat House—the tithes of
Glenavy. extending over 13 townlands; the tithes of Aghalee, extending over 7
townlands; the tithes of Clonduff, extending over 21 townlands; and those of the
Island of Rathlin, together with the Church of Ballyorgan, in Lecale, the Chapel of
Cromac, situated on the Falls-road near Belfast ; St. Mary's Church, outside Carrick-
fergus. All these vast possessions nominally lapsed into the hands of the Crown, in
the reign of Henry VIII., but were retained by the neighbouring chiefs till the ascen-
dancy of the English power. in the reign of James I., enabled that monarch to
bestow them on his relative, James Hamilton, whom he ennobled under the title of
Viscount Claneboy. Vicars nominated by the abbot ministered in the Churches,
whose rectories were impropriated to the abbey, and enjoyed the altar fees, and
one third of the tithes, while the other two-thirds passed into the common fund of
the great monastery.

After abbot O’Dornan, others bore the title, though the succession was not
uninterrupted. In the beginning of this century, in company with the late
Dr. M‘Donnell, of Belfast, there visited the Protestant Church of Bangor an aged
ecclesiastic. whose whitened locks and venerable mien. threw around his person
an air of interest. and betokened to the most unobservant, that no casual visitant
was he. As he approached the communion table, near where once had been the
altar, a gleam of the sunshine of youth seemed to light up the features of the old
man, and his prayers, which at first were in silence, suddenly, through ecstatic
forgetfulness, were raised toa degree of audibility, that embarrassed his companion,
while it still more astonished the sexton. That old man was the Lord Abbot
M‘Cormack, the last abbot of Bangor. What a splendid subject for poet or painter !
That old abbot, bowed down with years—a stranger, and unknown —the connect-
ing link between the present age and the remotest past, standing on the same spot
whence his predecessors, more than twelve centuries ago—ere nations that have
long since disappeared. had yet come into existence—sent vut those bands of mis-
sionaries who converted the Franks and the Longobards, and for ever linked the
name of Bangor with the history of the Church !

The Lord Abbot M:Cormack was a native of the county of Antrim, and like all
the priests of the last century. he sought on the Continent that learning which the
laws denied him at home. The French Revolution having deprived him of the
asylum which the houses of his order afforded. he closed his days in Maynooth
College. and his ashes commingle with the sacred dust of a long line of abbots, the
successors of St. Senan, in I.araghbrine, close to the College wall.

