--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-278.png ---
246 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

1015. Died the abbot Chernaich,’ and the same year the
Danes destroyed the town.”

1040. The Danes continued their cruel ravages, and re-
peated them in 1069.*

1101. Magnus, King of Norway and Man, was interred in
this abbey in this year, or in 1103.>

1111. The town was again destroyed by the Danes.°

¥ Annal. Ulst. * Tr. Th., p. 633. *Jd. > Annal. Mann. * Tr. Th.,p. 633-

traditional legend told by the people around Downpatrick, which relates that the
chest was of stone, and that it floated on until it was cast up on Horse Island by
a high tide, which covered it with sand. It happened that there were at that
time many cows grazing on the Horse Island, and it was remarked that one of
them, which belonged to a poor widow, continued for days licking the sand at a
certain spot, and was never seen eating grass, yet she gave more milk than any
other cow in the herd. This matter having attracted the attention of some curious
ersons, they removed a portion of the sand, and found St. Columkill’s coffin!
hese old legends are evidently of a bardic origin.

A.D. 775—‘* Macniadh, son of Ceallach, abbot of Dun-Leathglas, died.”

A.D. 785—‘' Dungal, son of Laoghaire, abbot of Dunleathglas, died.”

A.D. 795—‘“* Loingseagh, son of Fiachra, abbot of Dun-Leathglas, died.”

A.D. 823—“ Dun da-Leathghlas was plundered by the foreigners,” but swift
vengeance soon overtook the Pagan Danes, for, in the same year, “ A battle was
gained in Magh-inis (Lecale) by the Ulidians over the foreigners, in which many
were slain,” ‘‘ Suibhne, son of Fearghus, abbot of Dunleathglas, anchorite and
bishop, died.”

“AD. 879—“ Scannlan, abbot of Dun-Leathglas, died.” ‘‘The Annals of
Ulster” add that he was strangled by the Ulidians.

A.D. 939—‘* Oenacan, priest of Dun-Leathglas, died.”

A.D. 940—“ Dun-Leathglas was plundered by the son of Raghnall and his
foreigners. God and Patrick quickly took vengeance of him for this deed, for
foreigners came across the sea and attacked them upon their island, so that the
son of Raghnall, their chief, escaped to the mainland. He was killed by Madud-
han, King of Ulidia. in revenge of Patrick, before the end of a week after the
plundering.” The island in which the Danes were attacked by a hostile band of
their own countrymen was probably one of those artificial islands called crannogs,
which the Irish then used as fortified habitations, to which they retreated in
time of danger. The “ Terrier” informs us that the bishop possessed, near Down-
patrick, certain lands called the “ Bishop's island, and both the crannochs, one

lowland.”

P A.D. 951—“ Maelmartin, son of Maenach. priest of Dun-Leathglas, died.”

A.D. 954—“ Gaeithine, learned bishop of Dun-Leathglas, died.”

A.D. 952—“ Finghin, distinguished bishop of Dun-Leathglas, died.”’

A.D. 970—‘‘ Cathasac, son of Fergus, comharba of Dun, died.’ The term
“ Comharba” is used by the Irish writers in the sense of heir or successor to the
spiritual dignity as well as the temporal rights of the founder of a church.

A.D. 988—‘‘ Dun-Leathglas was plundered and burned by the foreigners,” and
“ Maelmoghna O'Carroll, Airchineach of Down, died.” The Irish ecclesiastical
title Airchineach, which is anglicised Herenach and Erinagh, the latter of which
forms gives name to the townland of Erinagh, in the parish of Bright. is explained
by Dr. Reeves as ‘hereditary warden of a church,” and by Dr. O’Donovan as
‘“lay superintendent of church lands.” Anciently the office was probably held
by an ecclesiastic, but in more recent times it would seem to have been exercised
by a layman. In some instances, on the death of an erenagh, the bishop appointed
to the office some member of the family in which the erenaghship was hereditary,
and he observed the same rules that regulated the selection of tanists for the clans.
At times the temporal princes were selected by alternate succession from two or
more families, and such would seem to be the case in the office of erenach of

