--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-179.png ---
County of Cork. 153

are richly chased with floriated ornaments, and its summit is surmounted by a
Cross. It opens with two folding doors which, thrown back, display the Image
within. The reverses of these doors bear a Crucifixion, and a figure of a Saint
in prayer, respectively. On the outside is this inscription in Roman letter :
““ORATE . PRO. ANIMA. ONORIAE. FILL. IACOBI. DE.GERALDINIS . QAE. ME.
FIERI . FECIT . ANNO . DNI. 1617.”

1644,—A Most General Chapter, held this year at Rome under Thomas Turk
of Cremona, 56th Master of the Order, passed the following decree, respecting
the offerings made in this Friary : ‘‘ We apply all alms, which are offered at the
most venerated Image of the B. V. Mary of Yoghel, to the use of the Monastery
of Yoghel itself, nor may the Provincial in future dispose ef them in any other
way.

1661.—From the Liber Tenurarum in the Exchequer Record Office, it appears
that Richard, Earl Cork, was this year tenant of the late Monastery, or House
of Friars Preachers Observant, near Youghall, with 6 gardens (the tithes thereof
excepted), held of the King in capite, at 15d. per annum.

1698.—1 May. An Act having been passed, which commanded the departure
of all Monastic Orders out of Ireland, never to return on pain of death, the
Dominicans of Youghal were constrained to leave: and they deposited their
Madonna Shrine with Sir John Hore, of Shandon Castle, co. Waterford.—[O’Heyne’s
Epilogus Chron. p. 15.) .

1756.—The brethren in this year were Thomas O’Kelly, the Prior, Dominican
Houlaghan, and James Flynn. They had their venerated Shrine again in their
keeping.—[ Hid Dom. pp. 273, 274.]

Saint Mary's Church, Youghal. Yn the northern part of the town of Youghal,
on the slope of a hill, then as now called Knock-na-Vauriagh (i.e., Mary's Hill),
a Church dedicated to the Virgin, was founded in the eleventh century. That
earlier religious edifices preceded the building on the same site, there is little doubt.
Indeed, we might almost infer, from considering how important the seaport at
the mouth of the Blackwater hadalready become, that such was necessarily the
case. Nor should we stumble at the fortuitous circumstance of our inability
to trace, with certainty, the more ancient foundations. When churches would
successively arise on the same spot, each exceeding its lArareee in size, it would
happen that, in some cases, the lesser building would be incorporated with the
larger so as to lose all its distinguishing features ; and, in others, would be wholly
cleared away, in order that space might be obtained for the new structure, In the
doorway of the square massive Tower of the present building, enclosed between
two pointed arches, is the moulded circular entrance of this Church, and on the
right hand as you enter, the wreck of the base-mouldings belonging to the columns
that supported it. From the drip to the arch, and from the mouldings of the bases,
we can easily tell that this door formed the South Entrance to the ancient
Church, which lay east and west across the present site of the Tower. .The
foundations of the western wall were uncovered a few years since by workmen
excavating for a vault, and were found to lie about six feet to the west of the Tower.
The visitor sees the time-worn stones of this portion of the destroyed building used
again as materials in the lower half of the west side of the Tower, and will readily
contrast them with the fresher stones in the upper portion and in the other three
sides. But the most interesting fragment of the Norman church is preserved in the
North Transept Aisle of the present building, which appears to have been formed
out of part of the old ruined Choir. It is a moulded, circular sepulchral arch,
resting on two low moulded columns, with capitals and bases. Immediately near
it, have been found more of the tapered tomb-flags, popularly called stone-coffin
lids, than in any other part of the building. Most of these were monuments in
the older church. Some two or three belong to the thirteenth century, and should
be assigned to the present edifice. With a single exception, all our tapered tomb-
flags were wilfully Broken in pieces centuries ago ; and the existence even of their
fragments was unknown, until recent researches brought them to light.

This ancient Church continued in existence during the eleventh and twelfth cen-
turies ; but we have been unable to recover its records. There are some grounds
for believing that it was dismantled by the great tempests of 1192, which, the
Irish Annalists tell us, threw down many houses and churches in Munster, and

