--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-330.png ---
292 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

There was an ancient abbey here, wherein the feasts of the
three Saints Nassad, Beoan, and Mellan, who flourished about
the middle of the seventh century, were observed on the 26th
of October.®

It is now unknown.

Teghdagobha ;** this abbey, which is now unknown, is said
to have been in the barony of Iveagh, on the river Bann; it
was founded by St. Gobhan, said to be the father of 1000
monks in this monastery ; although others say that his abbey
was at Killamery,' in the county of Kilkenny, and that he
was buried at Clonenagh,* in the Queen’s county ; there were
seven saints of this name.4

Toberglory ;* Sir John de Courcey founded an abbey to
the honour of St. Thomas the martyr near this well, which

* Act. SS., p. 90. * Called anciently, Killamhrindhe. % Called in ancient times,
Cluain Ednech. © Act. SS., pp. 92 and 750.

of Loughbrickland. It is thus noticed by the ancient gloss on the names Nasad,
Beon, and Meldan, in the Martyrology of Angus, at the 26th of October :—‘é.e.,
three saints from Britain, and are [interred] in one church, #.¢.,, Tamlacht Menand,
at Loch Bricrenn in Iveagh, in Ulidia.” The Calendar of the Four Masters
mentions only two names :—‘‘ Beoan, bishop, and Mellan of Tamlacht Menan, on
Loch Bricrenn.” These two persons are mentioned in the Life of St. Fursaeus
(Acta SS., p. 79, col 2), as concerned in an occurrence which the Annals of Ulster
refer to the year 626, and are noticed by Bede as “ Olim sacerdotali gradu potiti.”
—(4.E., iii., 19). A trace of the name Tamlaght Menan is preserved in the town-
land Meenan, which is situated in the southern part of the parish. The church is
also noticed by the Martyrology of Tamlaght, which differs from the gloss on AEngus
only in calling the spot Tamlacht Umhuil (77ias 7%., p. 378; Acta SS., pp. 90-
271). During the time that Bishop Percy presided over this See, the discovery of
an antique golden ornament (which, from M. Dubourdien’s description, appears
to have been a torque) in the townland Drumsallagh, gave rice to an examination
into the ecclesiastical history of the neighbourhood ; and it was found by Dr. Shiel,
the Vicar-General, that in the same townland ‘‘there had formerly been a monastery
of the Order of St. Francis ; that after the dissolution of the religious houses in
Ireland there remained several mendicant friars who still housed round the ruins
of their monastery, which was situated about two hundred yards from the old
church of Aghaderig, in the same townland ; the ruins of the church remain until
this day, but most of the ruins of the monastery, with its choicest stones, were
removed about an English mile, to the place where the church now stands. Dr.
Shiel found, upon further inquiry, from an old man, whose name was Fegan, and
above ninety years of age, that he remembered the walls of this building standing
to the height of three or four feet, and about ninety feet in length, but that above
forty years ago they had been removed to make room for a bleach green.”—
Daubourdien, Stat, Surv. See Reeves Eccl. Antig.

43 Teghdagobha ( 7¢ach-da-gobha), “ house of the two smiths,” was written, in
the fifteenth century, Teachgowo, Teachghawa ; in the following century the name
assumed, or at least approximated to the modern form Seagoe-Suidhe Gobha, “the
seat of Gobha,” from St. Gobhan, of whom the Calendar of Cashel, as cited by
Colgan, thus speaks :—“S. Gobanus de Kill-lamruidhe (now Killamery, in the
county Kilkenny), juxta montem Sliabh-na-nbhan-bfionn dictum : vel Gobanus de
Teg-da-goba ad ripam Bannii fluminis in Ibh-echach (the Bannin Iveagh), regione
Ultonie.”—See Reeves’ Eccl. Antig.

© Zoberglory.—Close to the wall which surrounds the county hospital in Down-
patrick, is an ancient well, called St. Dillon’s well ; and on the opposite side of the

