--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-202.png ---
176 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

him ; some writers make O’Flachertach the founders This
abbey was a daughter of that of Boyle.»

1241. Donnell More O'Donnell, King of the countries of
Tyrconnell and Fermanagh, having secluded himself from the

& War. Mon.  Allemande.

fix it on Inis-Samer, a small island in the river very near the fall, and remarkable,
according to O’Flaherty in his Ogygya, for being the residence of Partholan, who,
it appears, had a favourite dog called Samer, but there is hardly a foundation
for this opinion, Local tradition places it on the river’s bank close to the fall,
and there is no stronger argument than local tradition in doubts of this kind.
Then, here are remains, scanty, yet sufficient to establish it as the site of the old
abbey. One of the side-walls is still standing, and a portion of the western gable,
which evidently belonged to a monastery ; and there is also the deep reverence
of the place which has always endured among the people, who long long ago made
it a resting place for the dead. The present Brimate, Dr. M‘Gettigan, when
Bishop of Raphoe, had a strong wall built round the precincts of this venerable
ruin, thus adding a fresh proof to the many he has already given of his anxiety to
preserve the relics of our past religious greatness.

But this difference of opinion is not confined to the situation of the abbey ; the
name of its founder and the date of its foundation are also controverted. Archdall
fixes this date at A.D. 1178, and attributes it to Roderick O’Cannanan, prince of
Tyrconnell, but Jongelinus, in his “ Notitia Ab. Ord. Cist.” tells us that high
authorities set it down at 1188, while the Annals of Boyle give 1184, which has
been adopted by the Four Masters, who say :—‘* The monastery of Asseroe was

anted to God and St. Bernard by Flaherty O’Muldory, Lord of Kinell-Connell,
for the good of his soul.” Should one be disposed to follow this authority—
weighty no doubt—he must conclude that Archdall has made a mistake both in
the name of the founder and in the date of its foundation.

It may be useful to note here, consecutively, the remarkable facts connected with
this illustrious monastery as they are given in the Annals :—‘* A.D. 1241. Donnell
More O’Donnell, Lord of Tirconnell . . . . died in the monastic habit, victorious
over the world and the devil, and was interred with honour and respect in the
monastery of Assaroe, in the harvest time. A.D. Thomas O’Heraghty, Abbot of
Asseroe, died. A.D. 1319. Thomas, son of Cormac O'Donnell, Abbot of Ash-
roe, was then elected to the bishopric of Raphoe. A.D. 1333. Hugh, the son
of Donnell Oge O'Donnell, Lord of Tirconnell, . . . . the most eminent man of
his time for jurisdiction, laws, and regulations, and the chief patron of the hospi-
tality and munificence of the west of Europe, died, victorious over the world and
the devil, in the habit of a monk, and was interred with great honour and solem-
nity in the monastery of Assaroe. A.D. 1377. The monastery of Assaroe (near
Ballyshannon) was bumed. A.D. 1398. A great army was led by Niall Oge
O'Neill, King of Kinel-Owen, and the sons of Henry O'Neill, against O'Donnell,
and arrived at Assaroe ; and they plundered the monastery of all its riches. A.D.
1422. Turlough, the son of Niall Garv O’Donnell, Lord of Tirconnell, took the
habit of a monk in the monastery of Assaroe, after gaining victory over the
present world. A.D. 1450. Edmond, abbot of Assaroe, died. A.D. 1502. Art
O’Gallagher and John O'Loiste, two abbots, who contended with each for the
abbacy of Assaroe, died on the one day. A.D. 1519. Edmond Duv O'Dwyer,
abbot of Assaroe, died. A.D. 1550. The abbot of Assaroe (John, the son
of Donnell Roe O’Gallagher) died on the 29th of April. A.D. Cosnahmach
O’Clery was buried under the asylum of God and St. Bernard in the monastery
of Assaroe.” Mr. Allingham, a poet of high repute, and a native of Ballyshannon,
has given us a true portrait of the Abbey Asharoe as it is at the present day :—

“A little rocky rivulet runs murmuring to the tide,
Singing a song of ancient days in sorrow not in pride ;
The borc-tree and the lightsome ash across the portal grow,
And heaven itself is now the roof of the abbey Asharoe.”

