--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-314.png ---
278 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

Abbey of Regular Canons , in the lives of the Irish Saints we
are told, that St. Eugene and St. Niell, disciples of St. Patrick,
were abbots of Kil-chleithe, near Down.

Tr. Th., pp. 182 and 265.

a parcel of his archdeaconry, but as procurator of the church of Kilclief, and that
the profits should be applied to the repairs of the church. The Protestant church
occupies the site of the ancient church, but there are uo ancient remains except
portions of four or five cuneiform gravestones, a very perfect one of which is pre-
served in the vestry-room. On it is inscribed an ornamental cross, along the stem
of which are sculptured on one side the knight's sword, and on the other his banner.

Near the church is a fine ‘old castle in an excellent state of preservation, and
well roofed. It is of considerable size and height, and is in form nearly a square,
with the addition of two towers in front, in one of which is a spiral stair, and in
the other a stack of closets. It is a building of the fourteenth century, and was
the ancient see-house and manor of the bishops of Down. The report made by
the Protestant bishop, in 1622, says:—‘‘Item, the bishop findeth in his old
recordes that the castle and lands of Kilcleefe belongeth to the Bishop of Downe ;
but the possessor, Nicholas Fitzsimonds, denieth that the bishop hath any pro-
priety but only tos. Irish asa chiefe rent yearley, wch he hath tendered, but the
bishop refuseth to receive it. It appeareth clearly, out of the archbishop’s book
of Armagh, that this was an ancient dwelling-house and manor of the Bishop of
Downe, for the archbishop sent process for the Bishop of Downe for some offence
he had done in his castle and dwelling of Kilcleefe ; and to. this day there is a
chamber in that castle called the haulkes chamber, and the reason given by the
old natives and neighbours because the bishop's faulconer and hawkes were kept
there.” Harris has enlarged the story of the hawks’ chamber by telling that
there is “the figure of a fowl resembling a hawk carved on a stone chimney-
piece in a room on the second floor.” Now, the truth is, there is no stone chim-
ney piece in the second floor, and the whole story arose from a mistake made by
“ the old natives and neighbours,” who thought they perceived the outlines of a bird
in the cross patee on a cuneiform gravestone which has been built into the wall of
the old castle. It is in general ornamentation precisely similar to the gravestone
preserved in the vestry-room of the Protestant church ; and the fact of the grave-
stone having continued beyond the remembrance of him to whose memory it had
been erected, before it was used as building material in the fourteenth century,
testifies to the great age of the cuneiform gravestones which occur in our cemeteries.

As the parish of Kilclief belonged in ancient times to the Arch-
deacons of Down, it may not be uninteresting to give a list of those
dignitaries. About 1183 Bernardus was archdeacon; A.D. 1257. Reginald
was archdeacon; he became Bishop of Down in 1256. About 1300
the name of Galfridus, Archdeacon of Down, is attached as a witness to a charter.
A.D. 1340. Robertus de Pyncebek was Archdeacon of Ultonia (Down). A.D.
1365. William, who had been archdeacon, became Bishop of Down. He seems
to have been succeeded in the archdeaconry by John Logan, who is mentioned as
being archdeacon in 1367 and in 1369. John Dungan, who became Bishop of
Sodor and Man in 1374, had been previously Archdeacon of Down. In the
primatial registries the name of Henry Logan appears as archdeacon in the years
1425 and 1434; in the latter year he had a commission from the primate to visit
the diocese. Simon Somerset was archdeacon in 1438; he resigned his office on
account of age and infirmity A.D. 1455. He was succeeded by Philip de Erdeslye.
The next archdeacon seems to have been Henry Fox. Eugene Kragennis was
archdeacon ; he became afterwards Bishop of Down and Connor in 1541. It
would seem that, at whatever time Kilclief became the parish of the Archdeacons
of Down, the bishop conferred on him a portion of the mensal lands, because a
considerable portion of the visitorial duties of the bishop devolved on him, and to
the present day the Protestant archdeacon possesses a tract of 400 acres. The
“ Terrier” distinctly states ‘‘ this is the gift of the bishop.” The Ordnance Survey
includes all the lands of the archdeacon in one townland which it calls the Giede,
though they consist of three denominations— Drumroe. Carriff or Carrafeagh, and
Carrowvannish—which were called, in a document connected with the Chancery
suit of 1592, Spittle Quarter, Carrowreagh, and Fermeannes.

