--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-249.png ---
County of Donegall. 217

founded Teghbaoithin, that is, the house of Baithen, in Tyr-
connell ; this saint flourished A.D. 584, and 593.9 Taugh-
boyne is now a parish church in the diocess of Raphoe.’
Torre Island ;* an island extremely fertile, situated about
eight miles from the mainland of the barony of Kilmacrenan.

Act. SS. p. 369. Index, Tr. Th p. 495 * Liber Visit.

soothsayer among the Pagan Irish, foretold the Saint’s connexion with the
Seangleann. Speaking of the remarkable prophecies that existed regarding St.
Columbkille’s birth, he has the following :—‘‘ Not only did these and others who
were advanced in Christian perfection, and men full of God, foretell the birth and
holiness of St. Columb, but also many heathen soothsayers, long before the light of
Christianity blazed in Ireland. Of these, perhaps the most renowned was Finn
Mac Cubhall,a man whose great physical strength and numerous victories over his
enemies, have rendered him famous not only inhistory, butin story. He, in oneofhis
hunting expeditions, dropped upon a swift and noble stag, and let loose his best and
fleetest hounds in pursuit of the animal. On went the stag bounding over the
plain towards the river which divides the Seangleann from the surrounding country,
and arriving at the water's edge, plunged in and swam boldly to the opposite
bank. This Seangleann is in the extreme west of Tirconnell, running out far into
the ocean, rising into lofty bare mountains, and terminating in steep cliffs ; it has
been long sacred to St. Columb, and one of his principal monastenes stood there.
The hound in pursuit, though never before vanquished in the chase, did not follow
the stag into the water, but arrested his course and stood immovable on the river's
bank. Finn, astonished at this unusual faltering in his invincible dog, employed
his powers of divination to discover the cause, which, by God’s permission, he
succeeded in finding, and then announced it to his followers:—‘ There shall be
born in this country a child, by name Columba, in the ninth generation from Cor-
mac, now reigning ; he will be endowed by the great God with many graces and
gifts ; many churches and monasteries will be dedicated to him, and that region to
which the stag fled for refuge will be sacred to him, as well as a safe asylum for all
who avail themselves of it.’ The path traversed by the stag is at the present
time called Bealach-Damhain, i.e., ‘path of the stag.’" So far O’Donnell, and,
I may add, what will lend further interest to the story, namely, that the place
where the giant Finn started the stag is Loughros, in the parish of Inniskeel, and
the course of the chase is Croagh-Ballaghdown.

This and many another “tale traditionary” hangs around Glen Columbkille,
and still related by the pious and simple people of the glen, where the lover of
Irish traditions will find the most intelligent story-tellers among the primitive
inhabitants of this remote valley. Far down the glen stood the monastery built
by St. Columba, but a Protestant chapel now occupies its site. Some six or seven
years since this site was excavated in search of relics by Rev. Dr Todd, T.C.D., and
Dr. Petrie. gentlemen to whom the Irish literature of our age is deeply indebted,
but with what result is not known. At a turn in the road, which passes through
the middle of the glen, is a stone cross, which there is every reason to believe, from
the evidence of the monument itself, as well as from the traditions of the place,
was placed there by Saint Columba. A little further down, on a slope on the
northern side, is the Saint’s well, and adjoining it is the Saint's bed, where
probably there was a cell to which the Saint withdrew from time to time, at a
short distance from the monastery.

32 Torry, sometimes written Tory, Torree, and Inis-Torry. It is a desolate
island, lying out in the Atlantic some nine miles from the mainland ; its extent is
about three miles in length,very narrow, and affording but a very small area capable
of producing crops of any kind, which imposes on the wretched inhabitants the
terrible necessity of depending on the precarious life of fishing. To this inhospit-
able island St. Columba, as in the case of the Seangleann, was directed by the
voice of an angel to proceed and bless it. He received this command in the north
of Tirconnel, where he had been devoting himself to his pious duties, and having
taken a few companions with him he set out at once for his destination, Whenhe

