--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-235.png ---
County of Donegall. 203

part of the Franciscan friary ; over the door is a mitred
head in releivo£ Near to this town is a rock on which

© Pococke’s Fournal.

men were suddenly introduted, who seized upon Hart, and threatened him with
instant death unless he delivered up the fort of Culmore into their hands. This the
English officer, firm to his duty, refused. Theythen (O'Dohertyand MacDevitt) took
his wife, dragged her to thegate ofthe fortress, and through her fearsforher husband,
and the fears of the garrison for themselves, the fort was surrendered. The whole
garrison was immediately massacred, Hart and his wife alone being preserved alive ;
and O'Doherty and his Irish followers thus became essed of twelve pieces of
ordnance, besides a considerable store of arms and ammunition. All this had
been effected in the dead of the night, and no alarm had been given to the country.
After O'Doherty had armed his followers, he left Culmore fort under the com-
mand of an Irish chief named Felim MacDevitt, marched against Derry, and
attacking the place by surprise before day-break, made himself master both of the
city and garrison. Pawlett and most of his officers and men were put to death ;
many of the townspeople were slaughtered ; the bishop’s wife was carried away
a captive, and Derry was then plundered and burnt.” The charge of ‘‘cool
and base treachery,” in reference to the taking of Culmore, contained in this
passage, is just as unfounded as the story of Sir Cahir O'Doherty’s head. In
proof of this it is only necessary to produce the sworn statement of the jurors who,
under James I., held an Inquisition at Lifford, on the 13th of August. It is
thi: ““Cahire O’Dohertie, late of Birt Castle, in the county of Donegall,
knight, and Phelim Reagh MacDavid, late of the same county, together with
divers other most wicked traitors, in the year of the now king of England, the
sixth, at Buncranagh, in the said county of Donegall, traitorously, and as false
traitors to the now king, assembled in a warlike manner, and then and there by
violence and arms, viz.—swords, lances, and guns, designed, intended, and plotted
the death and destruction of the same now king, and then and there conspired
and designed to deprive and depose the same king of his royal power and govern-
ment of his kingdom of Ireland, and to take upon themselves, and thenceforth to
retain in their own power, against the will of the said king, the government of the
same kingdom ; and to prosecute that false, traitorous, and nefarious design, the
aforesaid Cahire O’Dohertie, knight, and Phelim Reagh MacDavid, with the
said other most wicked and criminal traitors and rebels, on the 20th of April,
in the year aforesaid, at Boncrenagh aforesaid, made insurrection, and every one
of them made insurrection, and then and there moved and excited divers lieges
and subjects of the king to a rebellion against the said king, and by violence and
arms, viz.—swords, lances, guns, and other arms, offensive and defensive, then
and there raised cruel and open war against the same king and his faithful
subjects, and from thence proceeded in a warlike manner as far as the fort of
Culmore, in the said county of Donegall, and took into their own hands, and
retained intheir own power, that fort, together with divers pieces of ordnance
and other warlike engines belonging to the same Lord King which were in the
same, and from thence afterwards, to wit, on the 21st of April, in the year afore-
said, advanced to the city of Derry, and took into their own hands and session
the aforesaid city of Derry, and two castles in it lying, and plundered, bumed,
and demolished it from the foundation ; and then and there cruelly and traitor-
ously murdered George Paulett, knight, then vice-governor of the said city of
Derry, and divers other faithful and liege subjects of the king, and so they stood
and every of them stood in open and actual rebellion against the king and his
faithful subjects, and against the peace of the said now king, his crown and
dignity, and against the form and effect of divers statutes in the same case
made and provided. The said Cahire O’Dohertie, knight, afterwards to
wit, on the 5th of July, in the year aforesaid, being in rebellion af and near
Kilmacrenan, in the county of Donegall, together with the said other traitors,
fought and contended with the army or soldiers of the said king, then and
there remaining. . . . . . . . On the 2oth of April, in the year of
the said now King of England the sixth, the aforesaid Cahire O'Dohertie, knight,


