--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-286.png ---
254 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

1220. The Benedictin monks of Downpatrick humbly prayed
that the King, Henry III., would grant them some habitation
in England where they might sojourn or reside when business
called them thither, and that of his royal goodness he would
charitably assist in rebuilding their church, which had been
destroyed by fire in the late wars.'! We know not the issue
of the petition.

1224. W— was prior about this time.™

1237. R— was prior.”

1276. The prior Nicholas was made bishop of Down, and
died in 1304.°

\Rymer Fad., vol. 1, p. 250. ™ See Holy Trinity, Dubl. ™ See Lacie’s chart. to
Newry. ° War. Bps., p. 198.

chief men of the O’Kanes, perished on that disastrous field. O’Neill’s head was
cut off and sent to London as a trophy, which is lamented by M‘Namee, the clan
bard of the Kinel-Owen, in words which show how Down was regarded as a
favourite place of interment by the Irish of that period :—

“« Alas that his noble head was removed from Down,
From the place wherein is the grave of Patrick.
It is grievous to us that the king of Caiseal
Is not (interred) near the relics of Tailginn (St. Patrick).”

A similar testimony is borne by the bard O’Dugan in the year 1372 : —

“*From Dun-da-lethglas of the Cassocks
It is the royal cemetery of Erin,
Without any heed or gain there;
A town wherein the clay of Columb was covered,
In the same was buried
Brigid, the victory of females,
And as we leave them every victory,
Patrick of Macha (Ardmagh) is in the same grave.”

In the Pope Nicholas Valuation the Church of St. Patrick in Down was valued
at five marks, and the Temporalities of the Abbot were valued at £41 55. 4d.

The brilliant and decisive victory achieved by the Scots over the English at
Bannockburn, in 1314, having awakened among the Northern Irish hopes of similar
success, they offered the crown of Ireland to Edward Bruce, the brother of Kin;
Robert of Scotland. Edward accepted the offer, and the country was deluge
with blood during three years while the war lasted. Grace's Annals, at the year
1316, say—‘‘ The monasteries of St. Patrick of Down and of Saul, with many
others are plundered. . . The Church of Bright, in Ulster, full of persons of
both sexes, is burned.”

“*The Annals of the Four Masters” record, at the year 1375—‘‘ A great victory
was gained by Niall O’Neill over the English at Downpatrick, when Sir James
(Talbot), of Baile-atha-thid (Malahide), the King of England’s Deputy, Burke of
Camline, and many others not enumerated, were slain in the conflict.” This
defeat of the English is not noticed by any of the English historians, and conse-
quently it cannot have been so important as the Irish writers pretend ; neverthe-
less, the English are forced to draw a very gloomy picture of the state of their
colony in Ireland about this epoch. There is Pree in the Chapter House,
Westminster, a memorial forwarded to Henry IV., about the year 1410, from the
Clergy and nobles of Down, in which they depict the terrible state to which they
were reduced. To this document are annexed, amongst others. the signatures and
seals of the Bishop of Down, of the Prior of Down, and of the Archdeacon of
Down. The scal of the town of Down is bruken off.

