--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-240.png ---
208 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

in our records, several safe conducts granted by the Kings of
England to foreigners desirous to visit it, and particularly in
the year 1358, to Maletesta Ungarus, knight ; another, bear-
ing the same date, to Nicholas de Beccario, a nobleman of
Ferraria ;¥ and in 1397, one to Raymond Viscount de Perilleux
and Knight of Rhodes, with a train of twenty men and thirty
horses.* But this purgatory must have fallen afterwards into
disrepute, for we find, that by the authority of the Pope,
Alexander the VIth (he having considered the same in the light
of imposition), it was demolished on St. Patrick’s day, in the
year 1497, by the father guardian of the Franciscans of Done-
gall, and some other persons of the deanery of Loughern,
who were deputed for this purpose by the bishop. A canon
of the priory of St. Dabeoc usually resided on the island, for
the service of the church and pilgrims.

~ Rymers Fadera, Tom. 6, p. 107. * Id., Tom. 8, p. 14.

a very celebrated church in a certain lake in Ulster, called Loch Gerg, in which is
that celebrated Purgatory of St. Patrick, whence either the lake itself or the
place in which it lies is called Géeann Gerc, where, in the adjacent territory,
St. Dabeocus is held in the greatest veneration among our people to this day ;
and his festivity is observed three days every year in our Festologies, viz. :—on
the 1st January, 24th July, and 11th December, according to Marianus Gorman,
Cathaldus Maguire. in the AMartyrologies of Tallaght and Donegall. But the
Calendar of Cashel fixes his festival on the roth of December. It is stated in the
beginning of his Irish life that he had foretold several things about the holiness
and virtues of St. Columb many years before the latter was born, from which it
follows that he flourished in the time of St. Patrick. He is ranked among the
chief saints of Ireland by Comineus of Connor in his book on them.” The lake
is a large melancholy sheet of water, being about six miles from north to south,
and four miles from west to east. In its eastern corner there is a small green
island known as the ‘‘ Saint’s island ;” the bridge which connected it with the
shore has disappeared, but the basis of solid masonry, on which the arches rested,
are still to be seen in the clear water. On this island it was that St. Dabheog
built his monastery, and established the famous “ Purgatory,” or penitential retreat.
In an inquisition taken at Donegall in the first year of James I., the following
notice of it is given :—‘ In the parts of Ulster, near the territory called O’Donnell’s
countrie, are the walls and monuments of a certain monastery or priory, late house
of the Canonical friars, called the priory of Lough Derg, alias commonly called
* St. Patrick’s Purgatory,’ which priory now is very much on the decay, and has,
these many years past, been totally abandoned and dissolved. The aforesaid
Prog, lies and is situate in a certain small island in the middle of a lake, called

ghdarg, about fifteen miles from the village of Donnagall aforesaid. The
prior of the monastery aforesaid, at the time of the dissolution and aban-
doning aforesaid, was seized as of fee in right of the priory aforesaid, of the
site, circuit, ambit, and precinct of the said late house, with the appurtenances, in
which are one old church, very ruinous, and walls of stone lately levelled, with
small pieces of land circumjacent, containing 14 acres of land, and of the whole
island aforesaid, containing about 10 acres, and of certain lands and hereditaments
to the said house and island adjacent, called Termon Magrath and Termon
McMonghan, containing 4 quarters of land of the great measure . . . . .”
The barren island-rock where the ‘‘station” is now held, is not 10 acres in
extent, nor is it and, and therefore we conclude that the island described in the
Inquisition is the ‘‘ Saints’ Island.” ‘‘In_ 1632,” Mr. Otway, in his Sketches in
Donegal, writes: ‘‘the State ordered Sir James Balfour and Sir William Stewart
to seize unto his Majesty’s use this island of Purgatory, and accordingly we find

,

