--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-140.png ---
114 . Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

bones were afterwards deposited in a silver shrine ;* his festival
is held on the 25th September’

St. Nessan, a disciple of St. Barr, and a presbyter of Cork,
died March 17th!

4 War. Bish. p. 556. °Calendar. Vet. * Act. SS. p.630.

“¢ And now having succeeded to our paternal Kingdom, relying upon the Divine
assistance, we have undertaken, for the salvation of our soul, and of the souls of
our parents, to defend the said church in such manner as it becomes royal munifi-
cence to do, and to re-edify and enlarge the same, in honour of the saints under
whose protection the said place is known to be. Be it therefore known to all the
faithful, that we do confirm, for all time to come, to the said foundation, all that
the said place now justly possesses, either by the paternal donation, or by the
grants of other kings ; for my glorious father, the King, bestowed upon the said
place Lysnoldarrah, and Diarmid O’Connor endowed it with Aillina Carrigh.

“« And be it known, furthermore, that we have ourselves granted to the said pil-
grims the lands of Illa, and by this our charter do confirm the same : and our illus-
trious son Cormac, at the request of Catholicus, Archbishop of Tuam, has granted
in perpetuity to God and to St. John, the lands of Maeldulgi, for the salvation of
his soul and of ours, to be enjoyed freely and without molestation, and exempt
from all secular services, which grant of said lands we also hereby confirm.

“Now, finally, we do take under our protection the said monastery, with the
aforesaid lands, which we exempt from all secular charge, and yield freely and
peaceably to God for all time to come. And lest at any time any one should pre-
sume to call in question the truth of those former grants, or of this our present
grant, we have authenticated this charter with the impression of our seal, and de-

ered it, in the presence of fitting witnesses, to the King of Connaught, to be
reserved.
sa And the following are witnesses, on the part of the clergy and people :—

“*CHRISTIAN, Bishop of Lismore, Legate of the
Apostolic See.

**Donat, Archbishop of Cashel.

““GrEGorY, Bishop of Cork.

‘«Bricrus, Bishop of Limerick.

«* BENEDICT, Bishop of Ross.

‘*MATTHRW, Bishop of Cloyne.

“Donat, Abbot of Mayo.

‘*Grecory, Abbot of Cong.

“* EUGENE, Bishop of Ardmore.”

Of the old church thus repaired, the steeple is the only part that now remains.
A round tower formerly stood in the church-yard, but all traces of it have lon;
since disappeared. A Frenchman, M. De la Boullaye, who travelled in Irelan
in 1644, and published an account of his tour, at Paris, in 1653, writes that—“ In
one of the suburbs of Cork there is an old tower, ten or twelve feet in circum-
ference, and more than one hundred feet high, which they firmly hold to have been
built by St. Barre.” And speaking of the ruins of Gill-Abbey, he says they are
situated at the distance of one mile from Cork, ‘‘ opposite the well called by the
English Sunday Spring, to the south side of the sea... . . Hereis a cave, which
extends far under the ground, where, they say, St. Patrick resorted often for
prayer.” This is the cave referred to in our ancient writers as the “‘ antrum Sancti
finbarri.” The MS. of Dive-Downes, who was Protestant Bishop of Cork
towards the close of the t7th century, describes the parish of St. Finbarr as com-

ising the parishes of St. John, Rinn-Mahon, St. Stephen, St. Nicholas, and St.

‘ary-de-Narde. He adds:—“ There is one mass-house in the parish ; ’tis now
ruinous. . . . . Colman Sarsfield is Popish priest of this and the united parishes ;
he has been here about four or five years. He has a mass-house (the one above
referred to) near Red-Abbey. He was bred at Bourdeaux, in France, in the Irish
seminary. Sarsfield says Mass twice every Sunday morning ; and the rest of the

