--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-246.png ---
214 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

White Friars, and dedicated to the Virgin Mary by M‘Swine-
fannagh.?

Inquisition 15th September, 43rd Queen Elizabeth, finds
that this friary, containing a church and steeple, a cloister,

° War. Mon.

The ship stood out to sea, and in due time arrived at Dublin, where the young
prince was consigned to the dungeon of the castle, from whence he escaped through a
sewer five years afterto the Wicklow mountains, and with great difficulty reached his
father’s castle at Ballyshannon. Another incident far more important and far more
touching than the kidnapping of the young Hugh Roe, was witnessed hy the little
town of Rathmullan. This event is known as ‘‘the Flight of the Earls,” which
recently became the subject, as well as the name, of an able and popular work, by
the Rev. C. P. Meehan, Dublin. ‘‘A ship carried from Rathmullan, the Earl
O'Neill,” write the Four Masters, ‘‘(Hugh, son of Ferdorah), and the Earl
O'Donnell (Rory, son of Hugh, who was son of Manus), and many other nobles
of the province of Ulster. These are the persons who went with O’Neill,
namely, Tis countess, Catherina, daughter of Magennis. and her three sons, Hugh
the baron, John, and Brian. . . . . . . . These were they who went
wth the Earl O’Donnell, namely, Caffar his brother, with his sister
Nuala ; Hugh, the Earl's child, wanting three weeks of being one year old;
Rose, daughter of O'Doherty, and wife of Caffar. . . . 1. - sss ee
They embarked on the festival of the Holy Cross, in autumn (1607). This was
a distinguished company ; and it is certain that the sea has not borne, and the
wind has not wafted, in modern times, a number of persons in one ship more
eminent, illustrious, or noble in point of genealogy, heroic deeds, valour, feats of
arms, and brave achievements than they. Would that God had but permitted them
to remain in their patrimonial inheritances until their children should arrive at
the age of manh 1 Woe to the heart that meditated, woe to the mind that
conceived, woe to the council that recommended the project of this expedition,
without knowing whether they should to the end of their lives be. able to return
to their native principalities or patrimonies !” Amongst Mangan's translations
from the Irish is a touching elegy, said to have been composed by O'Donnell’s
own bard, Owen Roe MacWard, who accompanied the chieftain in his exile.
This beautiful poem is addressed to Nuala, O’Donnell’s sister, whom the bard
finds in solitary grief, at the grave of her illustrious relatives, on St. Peter’s Hill,
at Rome.
L
‘*O woman of the piercing wail,
Who mournest o’er yon mound of clay,
With sigh and groan ;
‘Would God thou wert among the Gael !
Thou wouldst not then from day to day
~Weep thus alone.

13m
“°'Twere long before, around a grave
In green Tirconnell, one could find
This loneliness ;
Near where Beunn-Boirche’s banners wave,
Such grief as thine could ne’er have pined
Compassionless.

ql,
» What do I say? Ah, woe is me!

Already we bewail in vain
Their fatal fall !

