--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-180.png ---
154 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

destroyed much cattle. Nearly on the same site, a new and splendid pile arose
in the commencement of the thirteenth century. The founders were Richard Ben-
net and Ellis Barry his wife, of whom (save their Memorial in the South Transept)
we know nothing. Both names, however, are those of distinguished Anglo-Nor-
man families. The founders set apart for themselves the South Transept, called
the Chauntry of Our Blessed Saviour, as a mortuary Chapel ; and largely endowed
it with lands in the neighbourhood of the Town, forthe maintenance of the offici-
ating priest. St. Mary's, as now established, soon reached a well-ascertained pre-
eminence over the other churches of the district. The taxations of Pope Nicholas
IV., in 1291, and of Pope Boniface VIII., in 1302, declare it to be the richest
benefice of the whole diocese of Cloyne. The bishopric itself is entered in these
documents, as rateable at 185 marks, or about £123. The prebend of Glenowyr
(Glanore or Glanworth) is valued at 284 marks, or £19; while the church of
Yoghel, or Yoghull, is set down at £25. In the taxation of Pope Nicholas,
Youghal is entered, under the head of ‘ Taxacio Beneficiorum Ecclesiasticorum
de Omakylle, in these terms :

“‘ Ecclesia de Ygohel, cujus rector est hoc anno Nicholas de Cler,

vicarius Robertus de Halywell, taxatur ad xxv/i.......... decima Ls.”
That of Pope Boniface is of the same import. In the rural deanery of ‘ Omaéyll,
appears :

“Ecclesia de Yoghull, xxv/i........ cccseecccssecsseee « cereeeee Gecima Ls.”

Nicholas de Cler, who, when the former taxation was made, enjoyed the
wealthy rectory of Youghal, was of the Norman house of Hertford ; and at this
period his family owned the town, and presented to the living.

On the foundation of the College, 27 Decem. 1464, by Thomas, eighth Earl
of Desmond, the Church became Collegiate, and was served by the Warden
and Fellows. The Earl, in 1468, re-edified the building, a special Indulgence
being granted for this purpose by Pope Paul II.

When Commissioners of Queen Elizabeth made inquisition, 31 August,
1590, respecting the diocese of Cloyne, they returned the ‘ Guardianatus
Ville a Collegii de Yoghail' as rateable at 100 marks (£66 13s. 4d.), while
they valued the ‘ Episcopatus' at but £10 10s. od. But the time had come,
when its revenues were to be alienated from the Collegiate Church for
ever. Nathaniel Baxter, chosen Warden in 1592, was obliged, 25 Aug.
1597, to pass his bond of 1,000 marks, which was to be forfeited in case he
did not, in 40 days after demand, resign his office into the Queen’s hands, and
did not suffer her agerts to take possession of thesame. The College and
its revenues eventually passed into the hands of Richard Boyle, Earl of Cork.
In 1608, if we are to receive Boyle’s own testimony, he expended above £2,000
in re-building the Church and College; and, in a MS. preserved at Lismore,
entitled ‘Copie of a Particular of part of the first Earl of Corke’s Comonwealth
Workes,’ we find, first in order, mention of his doings here:

“Imprimis, The Earl of Corke hath re-edified the great decayed church of
Yoghall, wherein the townsmen in time of rebellion kept theif cows, and hath
erected a new chappel there in, and made it one of the fairest churches in Ireland.”

The Earl of Cork was not one who, to judge from his 7rue Remembrances, was
likely to allow his deeds to be hidden under a bushel ; and these statements
about his ‘re-edifying’ and ‘erecting’ at Youghal, we are constrained to
receive with no little scepticism. They are contradicted by proofs

et existing in the Church itself, as well as by the stern voice of contemporaneous
history. The Earl could not have ‘erected a new chappel’ at St. Mary’s; for
his own Transept—that, to which reference is made—preserves in all its details the
exact architectural features of the original structure, reared four centuries before
his time ; nor was his ‘re-edifying’ of the Church of any general character, as we
may easily discover by an examination of the several portions of the edifice. We
have also the testimony of his contemporaries, from which we shall offer one proof,
namely in reference to the Choir or Chancel. In 1641, the Protestant Bishop
of Cork and Ross addressed to the Earl of Cork a severe letter, yet extant,
‘charging him with having stripped the Vicars Choral, and left the Chancel of
Youghal, the revenues of which college the Earl had gotten into his hands in a
state of ruin,'—{Fasti Eccles, Hib. Vol. 1., pp. 226, 227, 2nd ed.]

