--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-298.png ---
262 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

This priory, with all its appurtenances, and one acre within
the site ; a caracute in Ballingarricke ; two carucates in Wood-
amston alias Balliwodan, and a carucate in Carricknalt, were
granted to Gerald, Earl of Kildare ; see Lismullen in county
of Meath.

Abbey of Cistertian Monks , this abbey was founded in the
12th century, by———— Bagnal," but we have not learned any
account of it.

Abbey of Cistertian Nuns ; such a nunnery is said to have
been in the town.™

2 Allemande. ™ Id.

The “Terrier” of 1615 sets down ‘‘the Priory of St. John’s, of Down,” as
bound to pay the bishop—“ in proxies, three marks ; in refections, three marks ; in
synodals, 2s.—six marks, 2s.” The Priory of St. Thomas is not mentioned in the
“Terrier,” which seems to show that it had been completely effaced long before
the date of that document. It would seem that its endowments were merged in
those of the Priory of St. John, for an Inquisition, held in Downpatrick in 1662,
found that the Earl of Ardglass had been seized of the site of the dissolved Priory
of St. John and St. Thomas, and of an acre of land and a close (Clausulum—pro-
bably “ St. John’s Close”) adjoining the priory. Grangecam, Ringreagh, Master’s
Island, otherwise called Horse Island, and a head-rent of §s. per annum from the
two townlands of Ballydugan, ‘‘ esteemed parcels of the possessions of the said
Monastery of Saints John andThomas,”

Father Edmund MacCana, writing some time after 1643, says that in his time
the Monastery of St. John was called by the inhabitants ‘Killin Seon,” that is,
the Church of St. John. This celebrated monastery enjoyed a large extent of
lands not second in fertility to those of any country. A confirmation Charter of
Edward III. is preserved in the tower on a patent roll. In it the house is desig-
nated as the ‘‘ Hospital of John the Baptist,” and ‘‘The Hospital of St. John of
the English outside the city of Down.” It recites a series of charters, followed by
a confirmation, viz., that of John de Courcy, granting certain customs ; that of
Richard de Burgo, granting six marks annually out of Ballydonnell, in Lecale,
and two carucates held by William de Mannde ; that of Stephen de Petraponte,
granting the town of Clochorton in the Ards, and four marks per annum ; that of
Nicholas de Trym to John Walle, rior, granting one mark from ‘‘ Villa Jordani,”
in the Ards. Another charter is from William Fitz Alan, granting four marks
from Cubynillis (Kircabbin) in Ynchemkargy (Inisargy), and the last charter
recited, that of William de Maundeville, granting an acre in the Garthe along
the highway from Villa Hay to Cumber, and the advowson of the Church of St.
Mary of Haytown (now Ballyhay, in the parish of Donaghadee). At the disso-
lution, the monastery of St. John was found to be seized of the site, church and
an acre of land within the precincts : of a ballyboe in Ballynagarrick, one in the
two towns of Ballywooden: one in “ Carrickyna,” together with the rectories of °
Ballywoodan, Kircubbin, Killard, and Ballyrickard (in the parish of Cumber).
Some of the inhabitants of Downpatrick suppose that Mary-street is so called from
some chapel which once stood there. This is not the fact. It is named from Mrs.
Mary Trotter, relict of Dr. Edward Trotter, who, during her widowhood, opened
that street, and built most of the houses in it.

13 Cistercian Nunnery.—The Nunnery of the Blessed Mary, belonging to the
Cistercian Order, seems to have stood to the north of what is at present the Pro-
testant parish church. In the map of 1729, the junction of Bridge-street and
Church-street is marked ‘‘Nun’s Gate.” The “Terrier” informs us that the
“*Domus Monialis of the Nuns of Downe” paid—“ in proxies, five marks; in
refections, five marks ; in synodals, 2s—ten marks, 2s.” ‘he possessions of the
house were very extensive ; they included Ballintogher, ‘“ Mill-towne, otherwise
called Ballymullin,” Tullyneere (now included in the townland of Ballintogher),
Ballysherrin, otherwise called Lisboy, and ‘‘ Ballygallneheagh, otherwise Bally-

