--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-304.png ---
268 Ancient Monasterics of Ireland.

St. Mochumma was abbot about the beginning of the 7th
century.*

A.D. 1130. This abbey was plundered by Connor, the son
of Artgal M‘Lochlin.>

In after ages it became a parish church in the diocese of
Down.*

The few remains show it was 45 feet in length and 20 in
breadth ; at the distance of 24 feet to the north west stands an
ancient round tower, about 35 feet in height, 47 in circum-
ference, and nine in diameter in the clear; the entrance is on
the east side, six feet from the ground. It is generally sup-
posed that there was a small fortified town here.!

Dundrum ; A mean village on the bay of that name, in the
barony of Lecale, where the ruins of a strong castle, boldly

*Act., SS., p. 587. »Annal. Annon. ° Visitation Book. % Hist. County of
Down, p. 73.

A Presbyterian Meeting-house occupies the site of the ancient church. The
doorway of the round tower is § feet 6 inches high ; 1 foot 10 inches wide at the
bottom, and gradually contracts to the top, where it is 1 foot 7 inches wide. A
drawing of it is given in Mr. Petrie’s Round Towers, p. 396.—See Reeves. It is
remarkable that wherever there is a round tower in the diocese of Down, the
church lands are known to have belonged at one time to the bishop.

In the Calendar of the O’Clery's the Abbey of Drumbo is noticed at two festivals—
July 24—“ Luighbe Droma-bo—Lughaidh of Drumbo.” Aug. 1o—“Cuimin
abb. O'Dhruimbo n-Ultaibh.” Cumin, abbot of Drumbo in Ulidia. But it
might be gravely questioned whether the Drumbo under consideration is the
Church to which St. Cumin belonged.

Mr. J. W. Hanna holds that Drumbo, mentioned in the Lives of St. Patrick, is
situated somewhere near the Quoile Bridge, on the arm of Lough Strangford, which
formerly washed Downpatrick, The Quoile Bridge is not far distant from Saul,
where St. Patrick died, and it would be on the direct road to Armagh. In the
townland of Lisbane, in the neighbourhood of Quoile Bridge, is a portion of low-
lying land called Salt Lough, over which the tide formerly flowed until restrained
by an artificial embankment, and in the same townland is a half-finished rath or
fort. Dr. Todd has adopted from Mr. Hanna the opinion that, somewhere in the
vicinity of Quoile Bridge is the site of Drumboe.

1 Dundrum.—The portion of Lecale which is cut off from the main body of the
barony is obviously that designated as Watertiry. The boundaries of Lecale are, with
the exception of that portion and the parish of Inch, so well defined by the sea, that in
ancient times it was named Magh-Inis (the insular plain), and it is still designated
by the people Isle-Lecale. Dundrum was included in Lecale from a very early
date. ‘‘The Annals of the Four Masters” relate that in the year 1147 the Cinel
Eoghain—that is, the people of the counties of Derry and Tyrone—pursued the
Ulidians ‘‘ till they reached the shore of Dun-droma, in Leath-Chathail (Lecale).
The Ulidians gave them battle there on the day of the Festival of Paul and Peter
(the 29th day of June) ; but they were defeated, and a great number of them slain,
together with Archu Ua Flathrai, Lord of Leath-Chathail. After this the forces
plundered and burned all Leath-Chathail, and carried off hostages from the
Ulidians,” This Dun-droma—the Fort of the Long Hill—is now Dundrum,
where the ruins of the castle occupy the site of the original dus or primitive fort.
The castle is usually supposed to have been erected for Knights Templars by Sir
John de Courcey, and that order is said to have held it till they were suppressed in
the year 1313. It was afterwards granted to the prior of Down, who held it till
the suppression of religious houses ; and the reversion of the castle and manor,
with the yearly rent of £6 135. 4d. reserved out of it, was granted to Gerald Earl

