--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-267.png ---
County of Down. , 235

the tithes of the said lands, which lie in the Ards and the
Upper Clandeboy, in or adjoining the country of Con M‘Neil
M‘Brian Furtough ; also the Grange of Earbeg in the county
of Antrim ; also the two Copland islands in the bay of Car-
rickfergus, in county of Antrim ; also the following rectories,
Clenongh and Anghellye in Kilultagh: Toenfada in Kil-
muchoret, in county of Antrim ; Clanduffe in Evagh; Balle-
laghrum and Ballemaghan in Lecale, in this county ; and the
advowson of all the vicarages of the above recited lands ; also
the tithes of the island of Raghlin ; annual value of the said
abbey, &c., besides reprises, £3."**
&& Chief Rememb.

character, unlike his predecessors, being neither Dalaradic in blood nor traditions.
Thomas Kennedy, abbot of Bangor, with the abbots of Saul, Inch, and Greyabbey,
the city of Down, the towns of Ardglass and Kilclief, the bishop of Down. and
George Baron Russhel, and many others, about 1405, petitioned Edward IV. in
behalf of themselves and ‘‘all the faithful and true liege peaple of Therldome of
Ulster, whiche some tyme was named the third moost rialle (royal) erldome in
Christiante ;” but was then daily attacked “ by see and lande, by see with Bretones,
and with Scottes of the Oute Isles, which both with Irishmen, enemyes of the land,
confedered—that is to say, with O'Neyll Bwy, O'Kane, M‘Gwylyn, Henry
O’Neyll, Con O’Neyll, M‘Gyunusses, M ‘Cartan, and the Offlynnes (O’Flynn, now
Lynn), which, within short tyme, fynally and utterly will destroy youre said earl-
dome and peaple, without that it be by your mooste graceous highnesse provided
to send unto them a certain of peaple to inhabite and to defende your said ground,
&c.” .
The original of this petition is in the Chapter-house, Westminster, but a copy
of it, with notes by Dr. Reeves, was printed in the transactions of the Royal Irish
Academy. To this document were appended the seals of the petitioners, but some
of them have been broken off. That of Thomas Kennedy, abbot of Bangor, is in
ood preservation, and gives some idea of the abbey front. The Hollywood and
Bangor Railway Company have copied it, and use it as their corporate seal. The
exclusion of the native Irish soon began to produce its natural effects on the abbey.

*An inquisition taken at Killyleagh, January 14th, 1664, regarding the lands held
by the late James Viscount Claneboy, enables us to identify the townlands in the
Inq. 1. Jac. I., which are here given in their modern names in the same order :—

Bangor, Portavde, Ballyfotherlly, Ballyminetragh, Balloo-juxta mare, Grooms-
ate allymacormack, Ballymaconnell, Ballycroghan, Ballyholme, Ballymagee,

allyree.

Carriostanclac-canduffe, Collosnescron, Carrownser, Carrownerreigh, Ballmowne,
and Carogh, are included in the modern townlands of Conlig, Corporation, Cotton,
Gransha, and Bangor Bog].

Rathgill, Lisbane, Ballyvarnet, Carnalea, Ballykillaire, Ballymullan, Ballysallough
Major, and Ballysallough Minor, Ballygilbert, Ballygrot, Ballyleidy. being the entire
parish of Bangor, and the townlands of Ballymaghan, Strandtown, and Ballymisert,
which constituted the ancient Rectory of Ballymaghan, or Bally O’Meachan, now
incorporated into the parish of Holywood.

Earbeg, intended for Inverbeg, at Larne, near which St. Comgall was born.
Clenongh Pe Glenavy.

Aughellye ” Aghalee

Toenfada ” Tremfade, an alias for Kilmakavet, in the parish of Killead.
Clanduffe, in Evagh, intended for Clonduff, in Iveagh,

Ballelaghrum oD Ballyorgan.

Ballyegan and Corbally were not in Bryanfertagh’s country. They are the
townlands, Ballyedock and Corbally, in Lecale.

