--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-276.png ---
244 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

Abbey of Canons Regular ; St. Patrick founded this abbey,
and was interred therein, A.D. 493 ;3 although some writers give
that honour to the abbey ot Glastonbury, in Somersetshire.*

« War. Bps., p. 22. * Stevens, vol. 1, p. 420.

Rus, or Ros, resided at Derlus, which seems to have been an earthen fort, which
stood on the site now occupied by the ruined castle of Bright, where he was
visited and converted by St. Patrick. He was a poet and a doctor of the Berla
Feini, the most ancient form of the Irish language, and he was one of the nine
persons appointed to draw up the Senchus Mor, the great law which regulated the
whole civil polity of the Irish. His festival occurs on the 7th of April. The first
church built in Downpatrick was probably of the same perishable material as that
used in the construction of the dwelMngs which stood within the circumvallations
of the neighbouring fortress. We should, however, remember that all the primi-
tive Irish churches were not constructed of mud-wall or planed timber, several
of them were built of stone and lime ; and we even find in the ancient lives of
St. Patrick that he prescribed the dimensions of some of the most important of
them, and directed that they should be constructed sixty feet in length.

The great glory of the Church of Down was the possession of the relics of St.
Patrick, St. Brigid, and St. Columba. _Jocelin, who collected nearly all that the
previous biographers had written regarding the interment of St. Patrick, relates
that “the people of Ultonia, having entered Down, celebrated the solemnities of
the Mass, and in the place foreshown by the heavenly light buried the venerable
body with all due veneration; and this desirable treasure—this Precious jewel—
they deposited beneath a stone five cubits deep in the heart of the earth, lest,
haply by stealth, it might be conveyed thence.”

It is very probable that St. Donard ornamented the tomb and enlarged or rebuilt
the church, and that may have been the occasion when the circumstance related in
the ‘‘ Book of Armagh” occurred. ‘“ When the church was being built over the
body, the men who were digging the ground saw fire bursting forth out of the sepul-
chre, and, flying back, they were afraid of the torching flame of the fire.” ‘* The
Annals of Ulster” copy the following entry from a chronicle called the ‘‘ Book
of Cuana”:—A.C. §52. “The relics of Patrick were enshrined sixty years
after his death by Columcille. Three precious reliquaries were found in the tomb,
viz., the Cup, the Angel’s Gospel, and the Bell of the Will. The angel directed
Columcille to divide the three reliquaries thus: the Cup to Down, the Bell of the
Will to Armagh, the Gospel of the Angel to Columcille himself. And it is called
the Gospel of the Angel because Columcille received it at the Angel's hand.”
Dr. Reeves adduces an objection, taken from a passage in the notes on the ‘* Life
of St. Patrick,” by Tirechan, which are in the Book of Armagh, where one of the
similitudes introduced by that writer between St. Patrick and Moses is ‘‘ where
his bones are no one knows ;” but a note by Dr. Reeves, in which he proves that
Tirechan’s part of the ‘‘ Book of Armagh” could not have been written before
the close of theninth century, supplies an answer to the objection, for long
before that period the sacred relics had been concealed lest they might fall into
the hands of the Danes. There is no doubt that a portion of the relics were
removed to Armagh, which accounts for the shrine containing the relics of St.
Patrick, mentioned by the ‘‘ Annals of Ulster,” at the year 830, as carried by
Forinnan, abbot of Armagh, into Munster, and explains why St. Bernard
describes Armagh as the place “ in which, when living, he (St. Patrick) ruled, and
when dead he rests.”

The true reason for the selection of Down asa resting place for the relics of
Brigid and Columbkille, was the belief universally received by the Irish people
that St. Patrick’s relics were in that church, as was recorded in his biographies
and in his ¢estamentum, a document which Ussher describes as written in the most
ancient Irish verses, where he is made to prophesy—

“Down, where will be my resurrection on the hill of Celtar, son of Duach.”

_ Immunity from incursions of the Danes could not have suggested the removal to
it of sacred treasures so highly valued, for our annals record that the town or church

