--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-315.png ---
County of Down. 279

The castle and lands of Kilclief were an ancient see
house and manor, belonging to the bishops of Down!

It is now a parish church in that diocess.«

Hospital ,*7 an hospital for the reception of Lepers was
founded here, under the patronage of St. Peter; see the Le-
per’s hospital in Downpatrick.

Kilméian ;* this abbey was founded by St. Fergus, bishop
of Down, who died the 3oth of March, A.D. 583.1 We meet
also with a St. Neman of this place, whose festival is held on
the 1st of September." It is now unknown.

Kitlrois ;® was an ancient abbey in Mugdorna."°

Kiltonga ;* on the north side of Newtown, inthe barony
of Ardes; here was a cell, of which some re mains were to be
seen in the beginning of this century.P

| Hist. County of Down, p. 23. “Visitation Book. * Act. SS., pp. 139, 794, and
Index. ™ Vard., p. 160. ™ Now the barony of Mourne. ° Tr. Th., pp. 77 and 379.
P Hist. County of Down, p. 268.

37 Hospital—In Drumroe, a townland in the parish of Kilclief, there is a field
called the Spidal or Spittle in the farm belonging to Mr. James Blaney, where
some years ago there were the remains of an ancient building, which have now
been removed ; but large quantities of human bones are still frequently tured
up. That was the site of St. Peter's Hospital for Lepers. From the Chancery
Rolls of Ireland it appears that, A.D. 1387, Robert de Vere, Marquis of Dublin,
committed to Nicholas Lepyng, clerk, the custody of the Leper's House near
Kylcleth in Ultonia, to hold during pleasure rent free. In 1415, the King
committed to John FitzRichard, chaplain, John Molyn, and Walter Sely the
custody of the hospitals or leper houses of St. Nicholas of Down and St. Peter’s
of Kilcleth, with their lands and appurtenances, to be held while in the King's
hands, rent free. Since therefore the patronage of those hospitals was vested in
the representatives of the Earls of Ulster, it is probable that those establishments
for the treatment of a disease then so common owed their origin to the princely
liberality of the De Laceys or De Burgos.

28 4'i/mbian.—The Annals of the Four Masters record, under the year 583—
“St. Fearghus, Bishop of Druim-Leathglaise (Down), died on the 30th of March,
and this was the Feargus who founded Cill-m-Bian. This bishop would appear
to have been a distinguished person, for his death, and the fact of his having

‘founded Cill-m-Bian, are mentioned in the Annals of Tighernach at 584, in those
of Ulster at 583 and $89, and in the Annals of Boyle at 557. It might be ex-
pected that the Church of Kilmbian would be found closely connected with the
see of Down. In the “Terrier” of the Churches and Ecclesiastical property of
Down and Connor, drawn up about the year 1615, there is the following entry :—
“*Kilmore Merone, the Bishop's mensal,” to which is appended this note—
‘* Kilmore Marone, § quarter lands, having 7 chappels belonging to it.” In the
modern parish of Kilmore there is an ancient grave-yard still used, but in which
there are no traces ofa church. It is called Killyman,which is no doubt the ancient
Kilmbian. It is situated in the townland of Barnymaghery. Mr. Hanna dis-
covered this long lost church.

% Kilrois—to be sought for in the county of Monaghan.

® Kiltonga.—In the townland of Killarnin, in the parish of Newtownards,
there was an ancient chapel called in the “ Terrier,” ‘' Killarneid,” speaking of
which the author of the Montgomery Manuscript says—t near Newtown is a piece
of ground called Killtonga. in which hath been y* cell of some devout person, but
few remains thereof are now to be seen ; yet at y® old ruins of it were found (a
few years ago), some medalls and crucifixes.”

