--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-208.png ---
180 Anctent Monasteries of Ireland.

A.D. 987. Died the archdeacon Dubhdaboirean.™

There are still preserved in the hands of the religious in
this neighbourhood, many books which formerly belonged to
the abbey, written by the hand of St. Mzelisa, who was edu-
cated here, and died 16th of January, A.D. 1086.*

Clonleigh ;* two miles north of Lifford, on the river Foyle,
and in the barony of Raphoe. St. Columb built the church

= Ann. Four Masters. * Act. SS., p. 108.

of Derry. It stood in the territory of Inishowen, but the place is now profaned,
and a great many of the books, written by the hand of St. Melisa, are still iu the
Possession of some pious men of the neighbourhood.” That Inishowen was the
territory in which this monastery was situated there is no doubt, but Inishowen is
a large extent of country, and hence the difficulty of identifying the exact spot
in it on which Both-chonais stood. O'Donovan, in one of his editorial remarks
on the text of the ‘‘ Annals,” confidently places it at Templemoyle, in the parish
of Culdaff, but he subsequently withdrew this pian to give place to another,
to the effect that Both-chonais is obviously the old grave-yard in the townland of
Binnion, parish of Clonmany, and barony of Inishowen. I see that this opinion is
the one adopted by the editor of a manuscript ‘‘by Duald Mac Firbis on some
Bishops of Ireland,” published in the proceedings of the Royal Irish Academy, 1870.
In this manuscript the following entry is made :—“ Cele-Christ, of Cill-Cele-
Christ, 3 March.” I think, then, we may regard the old cemetery of Binnion as
the site of the monastery of Both-chonais, for O'Donovan made a personal in-
spection of the place, and what he saw in the old grave-yard must have forced
him into a correction of what he previously considered a well-grounded opinion.
The St. Melisa of whom Colgan speaks as the brightest ornament of Both-
chonias, was also a native of Inishowen, and of the royal Engenian line. His
family, it appears, gave many distinguished ecclesiastics to the churches of Derry
and Armagh. His learning was as remarkable as his sanctity, for he was the
distinguished author of a great many valuable books, some of which, Colgan tells
us, were in his own possession, and many more of them in the possession of pious
men in the neighbourhood. Not one of these books is now to be found ; they
have disappeared, and no one in Clonmany or Culdaff knows anything about
them. Why is this? Whence comes it that every record and every vestige of
some of the most celebrated ecclesiastical establishments in this land have been
literally wiped out? Colgan, in the passage I quoted, furnishes the answer.
He says they have been “ profaned.”

* Clonleigh—One of those numerous seats of learning which made Ireland the
teacher of Europe for many centuries, and which, in the language of the Vener-
able Bede, ‘‘induced people of every country to flock to Ireland, as to a
mart of learning.” The Monastery of Clonleigh was suppressed by Edward
VL. and there is a long account of this fact in the Inquisitions. ‘On the
toth day of December, and 27th of the reign of Henry VIII., late King of
England, there was a certain college or religious house called Clonleigh, situate,
lying, and being in the parts of Tirconnell, lately called the county of Dunagall,
near the river of Loughfoile, not far from the Castle of Liffer, and there are
situate and lying there the ruined walls of the same late college or the religious
house, which college, in the 2oth year of the reign of the late King Edward VI.,
was abandoned, dissolved, and suppressed. The Provost of the said late college or
religious house of Clonelighe, at the time of the abandoning, dissolution, and
suppression of the same, was seized in his lordship, as of fee. in right of the said
late house, and of two quarters of land, with the appurtenances to said college
adjacent, together with all tithes of the same, and of two parts of the tythes of
the fish taken in the river aforesaid, near the land aforesaid, and near the land of
Liffer. The said provost of the college aforesaid, and other inhabitants upon
the land of the college aforesaid, were a long time, before the dissolution of same,
accustomed, from time to time, to fish in and upon the river aforesaid, by license

