--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-110.png ---
90 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

An abbey was founded here early, which was consumed
by fire A. D. 1278.™

The monastery of Quin, for Franciscan Friars, was founded
in 1402, by Sioda Cam M‘Namarra ;™™ but Father Wadding
places it in the year 1350, yet at the same time he declares,
that he thinks it was more ancient."

Pope Eugene IV. granted a licence in 1433 to M‘Namarro
to place the friars of the strict observance in this monastery ;
which, as Wadding observes, was the first house of the
Franciscan order in Ireland that admitted of that reformation.°
The same year Macon Dall M‘Namarra, Lord of Clancoilean,
erected this monastery, being a beautiful strong building of
black marble ; his tomb is still remaining.P

This monastery, with all the manors, advowsons, &c. of
Daveunwall, Icharve, Dounagoar, and divers others, with
the site of all the hereditaments thereof, was granted to
Sir Tirlagh O’Brien of Inishdyman, in fee, December 14th,
1583.4

The Roman Catholics repaired this monastery in 1604.7

Bishop Pococke thus describes its present state.* “Quin is
one of the finest and most entire monasteries that I have
seen in Ireland; it is situated on a fine stream, with an ascent
of several steps to the church ; at the entrance, one is surprised
with the view of the high altar entire, and of an altar on each
side of the arch of the chancel. To the south is a chapel,
with three or four altars in it, and a very fine Gothic figure, in
relief, of some saint; on the north side of the chancel is a fine
monument of the family of the M‘Namarras of Rance, erected
by the founder; on a stone by the high altar the name of
Kennedye appears in large letters; in the middle, between
the body and the chancel, is a fine tower built on the two
gable ends. The cloister is in the usual form, with couplets
of pillars, but is particular, in having buttresses round it by

™M'Geogh. ™™Ann. Four Masters. As quoted by Allemande. °Id. ?War.
MSS., vol. 34, p. 165. “Rolls. *Cox, vol. 2, p. 10. *Fournal.

Bunratty, about five Irish miles to the east of Ennis. The ruin is still in good
preservation, and is one of the most imposing and magnificent remains of monastic
antiquity in Ireland. It is beautifully situated on a gentle slope over a small clear
stream which, in its original course, was supposed to mark the extent of the monastic
sanctuary at one side. ,

The possession of this stream appears to have been much contested in times of
war. In the Catthreim Toirdhealbhaigh, or Wars of Thomond, we find a glowing
description of a battle fought here between the Earl De Clare and the sons of
Brian Roe O’Brien, in which the Earl is said to have taken possession of the
church of Cuiache (Quin), and to have used it as a shelter and citadel for his forces,
so that the sons of Brian Roe O’Brien had to burn the church to the ground in
order to secure the defeat of the Gud/ (foreigner).

