--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-260.png ---
228 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

921. Died the abbot St. Tarannan; he was also abbot of
Drumcliffe ;* his feast is on the 12th of June.‘

928. Died the abbot Celsus."

956. The abbot Tanudius, the son of Uderius, was this
year slain by the Danes.”

"Tr. Th. p. 510. * Fleming, Coll. “ Annal. Ulster, ™* Act. SS., p. 107.

Dalaradians, He perished A.D. 557 in the disastrous battle of Moin-Doire-lothair
(supposed to be Moneymore, in the parish of Derryloran), and his people, the
Dalaradians, were for ever driven eastward over the Bann. In the year 478
Fiachra Lonn, king of Dalaradia, distinguished himself in the battle of Ocha,
and received the territories of Lee and Cairloegh (extending from near Derry to
Toome) “as a reward,” from the Hy-Niall princes, This battle of Ocha formed an
important era. It enabled the descendants of Niall the Great to confine the elder
branch of the same race, to which they themselves belonged. to the provincial
‘overnment of Connaught, and to hold uninterrupted possession of the monarchy
for five hundred and nineteen years. The race of Niall, in their gratitude, were
munificent to their allies ; but, as it always was and will be, princes have pro-
verbially short memories, and past services were so far forgotten, that in less than
eighty years the Hy-Nialls expelled the Dalaradians, slew their prince, Aedh
Breac, and bestowed the territory on the O’Kanes, a branch of themselves.

A.1), 721. “St. Malrubha, abbot of Bangor, having gone to Alba, died in his
own church at Aporcrosan (Applecross, Ross-shire), on the 21st of April. Eighty
years, three months, and nine days, was the length of his life.” (See A.D. 671.)

A.D. 722. ‘St. Flann, abbot of Bangor, died.”

A.D. 724. ‘ Cochall Odra, scribe of Bangor, died.”

A.D. 739. ‘‘ The sea cast ashore a whale in Boirche (Mourne), in the province
of Ulster. Every one in the neighbourhood went to see it for its wondrousness.
When it was slaughtered, three golden teeth were found in its head, each of which
teeth contained fifty ounces. Fiachna, son of Aedh Roin, king of Ulidia, and
Eochaidh, chief of Ui Eathach (Iveagh) sent a tooth of them to Bangor, where it
remained a long time on the altar, to be seen by all in general.” This story was
currently told at the time of the English invasion. Giraldus Cambrensis picked it
up and considerably improved it by tellinga similar one of a stag, that was caught
in his time in Great Britain,that had all its teeth of a colour like gold. Duald Mac-
Firbis, in his genealogical work, speaking of Aedh Roin, King of Ulidia, says :—
“It was he that got the whale with the three golden teeth, and he gave a tooth of
them to the mason, #.¢., the mason that built the bridge (the bridge of the pass and
the bridge of Moindaimh), and he gave the other two to ornament the reliquaries
of the province. It was he who made a pilgrimage to Bangor, because one cow
had been stolen in his province,”*

* A monster of the deep, still more strange, was once caught in the nets of the
fishermen of Bangor, if we but credit the Leabhar-na-h-Uidhre, which tells the fol-
lowing wild legend :—‘ Eochaidh, from whom Lough Neagh derives its name,
was drowned in its eruption, together with all his children, except Liban, Conaing,
and Curnan. Liban was preserved from the waters of Lough Neagh for a full year,
in her grianan (palace) under the lake. After this, at her own desire, she was
changed into a salmon. and continued to traverse the sea till the time of St. Comgall,
of Bangor. It happened that Comgall despatched Beoan, son of Innli, of Teach-
Dabeog, to Rome ona message to Gregory, to receive orders and rule. When the
crew of Beoan’s curach were at sea, they heard the celebration of angels beneath
the boat. Liban (mermaid) thereupon addressed them, and stated that she had
been three hundred years under the sea, adding that she would proceed westward
and meet Beoan that day twelvemonths, at Inbher Oilatboa, (Larne), whither the
saints of Dalaraidhe, with Comgall, were to resort. Beoan, on his return, related
what had occurred, and, at the stated time, the ncts were set, and she was caught
in the nets of Fergus, of Milluc, upon which she was brought to land, and crowds
came to witness the sight (within the recollection of many still living, crowds went

