--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-159.png ---
County of Cork. 133

ganishe, containing by estimation five hundred and fifty acres,
at £15 18s. 4d., Irish money.

The church of the abbey, now the parish church, was a mean
Gothic building.*

Glunay, is said to be in the diocese of Cork, where the abbey
of the Vale of God was built, and which abbey, continues our
author, was a daughter of the abbey of Jerpoint, in county of
Kilkenny.»

Glanore, or Glanworth ;»»® has its situation on the river
Funcheon, in the barony of Fermoy. The family of Roche
founded a monastery here in the year 1227,° for friars of the
order of St. Dominick ;3 but Bourke says, this foundation
(dedicated to the Holy Cross) was at some later period.®

Grange; formerly called Grany, is seated on the river
Bride, in the barony of Muskerry, and a mile east of Kilcrea.
From Colgan we learn, that St. Cera, who died A.D. 679, built a
nunnery at Kilcrea,! but in the records it is said to be at Grany.&

The Great Isle 8®* in the barony of Barrymore, and form-
ing one side of the harbour of Cork, is four miles in length,

= Aud. Gen, *Tour through Irdand. p. 131. Allemande, i.e., The Golden
Vale. °Smith, vol. 1., p. 351. ‘War. Mon. *Bourke, p. 334. *Act. SS. p. 15.
SSmith, vol. 1, p. 211. %6Called anciently Inismore, in Ibhmaccaile, or Imokilly.
Vard. vita Rum.

and thou shalt get it,’ And the maiden being full of faith, attempted to reach
forth the right hand, and the hand was instantly filled with vigour and life, and
she reached it out and took the apple into it.

*« There was joy all over the king's palace on this occasion. and all gave praise to
God and to Mochuda, for this miracle, and Cuana said on that night to his
daughter, make now your selection. and say who you like best of all the princes of
Munster, and I will have him married to you; to this the maiden replied, ‘I
shall have no husband but the man who cured my hand.’ ‘Hear you that O
Mochuda,’ said Cuana. ‘Give me the maiden,’ said Mochuda, ‘and I will give
her as'a spouse to Christ, who cured her hand;’ and Cuana gave the maiden and
her dowry. with an offering of land on the banks of the river Neim, to God and to
Mochuda for ever, and his munificence was too great to be described.

‘«Flandat was the maiden’s name, and Mochuda brought her with him to Rahin,
where she spent her life most profitably with the other ‘Black Nuns,’ till
Mochuda was banished by the kings of Tara out of his own city, when he took
Flandat with him, and the rest of the black nuns, and when he had finished
his own city of Lismore, he sent Flandat to her own country, that she might
build a church there, and she built a noble church in Cluain Dallain, and it
is in Mochuda’s parish it is.” —Irish Life of Saint Carthach, O'Curry M.S., Catholic
University. .

"Glanore, or Glanworth; Inquisition 3rd of Saint Hilary, 31st Elizabeth, finds
that a grant was made of this priory and the possessions thereof to Maurice Viscount
Fermoy, at the annual rent of 15s. Irish ; but that the same was forfeited by the
non-payment of the rent.—Ordnance Survey of Cork, R.I.A., vol. iv., p. 73.

33 The Great Isle, St. Sarann, of Inismor (Great Island), is thus commemorated
in the Festology of Aengus Céle Dé at 15th May. ‘*Sarann, son of Archurr, from
Inismor, in Uibh Mac Caille, in Uibh Liathain in Munster ;” and the Irish life of
St. Findbarr states that St. Sarann settled in Drom Eighneach, in the territory of
Ua Lugdach, that he resigned his own church to God and to St. Barra (Findbarr),
and that Barra gave him a new monastery with its Religious.—Li/¢ of St. Findbarr,
O Curry, MS. C.U.T.

