--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-236.png ---
204 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

the O’Donnells, Princes of Tyrconnell, were always in-
augurated.®
» War. Annal.

being in rebellion, as is before mentioned, wasseized as of fee of that whole barony,
country, or territory of Inishowen, a/ias O’ Dohertie’s country, in the said county
of Donegall, and of all the castles, manors, demesnes, messuages, lands, tenements,
and hereditaments lying within the same country or territory, excepting all the
lands, tenements, and fereditaments which are parcels of the possessions of the
Erenaghs of churches, rectories, or any abbeys or religious houses, lately dissolved
and lying within the barony or country aforesaid. The said Cahire O’Dohertie,
knight, at the time of his being killed or in actual rebellion, as is before said, was
seized of the aforesaid country, territories, castles, manors, lands, tenements, and
hereditaments, and of every parcel thereof, except as before excepted, as by the
survey lately taken thereof, to which the jurors refer themselves, appears. But of
what goods and chattels the aforesaid Cahire was possessed at the time of his being
killed aforesaid, the jurors aforesaid have not the least knowledge.” According
to this sworn statement, the rebellion broke out not at Culmore, but at Buncrana,
and thence the victorious rebels, under Sir Cahir and Sir Phelim, proceeded ina
warlike manner to the fort of Culmore, and took it into their own hands. This is
very different from the act of ‘‘cool and base treachery” to which the taking of
Culmore is generally, but falsely, ascribed. Sir Phelim MacDevitt, the firm friend
of O'Doherty, and the chief actor with him in this rebellion, was betrayed into the
hands of the English soon after the battle of Kilmacrenan. Pardon, the restora-
tion of his vast property. and some of the highest honours at the disposal of the
English Crown, were offered to him by the Lord Deputy if he consented to renounce
the old faith of the Catholic Church and embraced the new one of the Reformation.
This offer was rejected with scorn, and Sir Phelim refused to accept life at such a
price. His constancy through the inhuman tortures to which he was subjected, has
gained him a place by the side of the most illustrious martyrs in the Church, while his

levotion to the young chief of Inishowen and to the popular cause, at a time when
it became the fashion of the Irish chieftains to stand well with the English, has
won for him the lasting admiration of his countrymen. He was executed at Lifford
on the 27th of September, 1608, and the circumstances of his glorious death are
related by O’Sullivan Beare, an historian who had taken part in, or was con-
temporaneous with, the facts he relates, and one whose testimony is pro-
posed as “second to none in historical value.” He writes as follows :--
“After the death of Doherty and the defeat of his brave little army at Kil-
macrenan, Sir Phelim MacDevitt hid himself in the mountains. He was
soon tracked by Government informers, and though still suffering from
the effect of his wounds, was dragged before the Lord-Deputy, who, in loud
and angry tones, demanded of him ‘where is the immense plunder taken by
yourself and O’ Doherty from the king’s subjects?’ Sir Phelim answered : ‘the spoil
taken by O'Doherty is all in my possession, but of what was taken by our soldiers
I know nothing.’ “Give up then what you hold,’ said the Lord-Deputy, ‘for it has
been taken by rebels from inoffensive and loyal subjects.’ ‘ Allow me to inform
your Excellency,’ ‘said Sir Phelim, ‘that the spoil taken by my young master is his
rightful property by the laws of war and of the holy Catholic religion,,but as he
is now in heaven, where he has no need of it, I will deliver it to you on condition
that you give me my liberty and permit me to emigrate to Belgium, Spain, or
France.’ ‘I will not only set you free,’ answered the Lord-Deputy, ‘and confirm
you in possession of the spoil you have taken, but will confer upon you the
most splendid reward, and the highest honour at the disposal of the crown, pro-
vided you renounce your religion, acknowledge the king head of the Church, and
swear allegiance to him.’ ‘ Never,’ said Sir Phelim, ‘will I renounce, for any human
favour however great, for any wealth however enormous, or for any position
however exalted, the holy Catholic, Apostolic, Roman faith, brought into this
land by St. Patrick, established by his miracles, professed unto blood and death by
my fathers, reccived by me in baptism, and maintained by me in unfaltering prac-
tise.” ‘ Fool,’ said the Lord-Deputy, ‘you refuse to accept a religion which will
secure to you the favour and affection of a powerful king, one who will be

