--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-178.png ---
152 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

1518.—At the General Chapter of the Dominicans held at Rome this year,
Garzia de Loaysa, a Spaniard, 39th Grand Master of the Dominicans, and
subsequently a Cardinal, issued an approval of the reformation of this Friary,

bsolving from his office the Vicar General appointed by Vincentio de Bandello,
but permitted him to be re-elected.

1542.—3 Aug. Order from the Lord Deputy to dissolve this house.

1543.—28 June. The King granted the custodiam of this Friary to Maurice,
brother of the Earl of Desmond, for three years, by the following letters :—

“Henry VIII. etc. To all whom etc. greeting. Know ye that, on the security
and pledge of Edward Russell and Richard Liston, Pentlemen, We have granted
to Maurice of Desmond, brother of the Earl of Desmond, the custody of
all the possessions, spiritual and temporal, of the late House of Friars Preachers
of and near Youghill, with its appurtenances: To said Maurice and his Assigns,
to have and to hold said custody from the day of ratification to the end of three years
following fully completed, Paying thence to Us annually into Our Court of Exche-

uer in Ireland, Thirty Six Shillings and Eight Pence Sterling, at the feasts of
t. Michael, the archangel, and-Easter, in equal portions, In testimony whereof
etc. Witness our beloved and faithful William Brabazon, Sub-treasurer of our
said Kingdom. Given at Dublin, this 28th day of June in the 33rd year of our

reign.”—[Memor. Roll. 33 Henry VIII. m. 24.]
1550.—21 April. The oldest dated tombstone now to be found in this burying
und, is of this time. It is thus inscribed: ‘*‘ Here Lyeth ye Body of Darby

en, who Departed This Life ye 21 Aprill 1550, Aged 35 years.”

1581.—28 April. This Friary, with six gardens within the liberties of Youghal
(the tithes excepted) was granted for ever, in cafite, to William Walsh, at the
yearly rent of 22 pence sterling.—[ Auditor General]. From him it passed for a
term of years to John Thickpenny, gent.—[ Hs. Dom. p. 273.]

1585-863 Feb. The Friary was granted to Sir Walter Raleigh, at a rent of
S12 19s. 6d., payable at Easter and Michaelmas; with a proviso, that the Act

assed at Limerick, anno 33 Henry VIII., for lands given by the King, shall not
be prejudicial to this patent. Signed, A. St. Leger.—[MS. at Lismore.]
1587.—Dr. Burke, quoting from a work, entitled 7heatrum Catholice et Pro-
testantica Religionis, p. 435, gives an account of the demolition of the Dominican
Friary in this year, with the fate of those concerned in the work. A “certain English-
man named Poer, while destroying the monastery of St. Dominic, in the northern
part of Youghall, fell from the top of theChurch and broke all his limbs. Likewise,
three soldiers of that town, who had cast down and thrown into the fire the Sacred
Cross of that monastery, were dead within eight days from the perpetration of
their crime. The first died of madness. The second was eaten by vermin. The
third was slain by the Seneschal of the Earl of Desmond.”

1603.—17 Dec. By an inquisition taken this day at Youghal respecting the
estates which had been conveyed by Raleigh to Boyle, the jury made the following
report about this Friary; ‘* Lastely, wee finde that the Abbie of Molana and the
late Howse of Observant Fryers of Youghall, with their possessions, does now lye
utterly wast, and have soe remayned ever since the leases made of them to John
Thickpenny, gent. deceased, upon the expiration of which leases graunted to the
said Thickpenny, Sir Walter Rawleighe’s estate [tooke] his beginninge.”—[Inqui-
sitions in Exchequer. ]

1604.—31 March. By an Inquisition taken this day at Cork, it was found
that Sir Walter Raleigh lately attainted of high treason, was seized in fee (among
others) of the Priory or House of Friars Observant, near Youghall, called ‘‘ The
Black Ffreers neere Youghall, with the appurtenances, together with its scite,
circuit, ambite and precinct; and all buildings, edifices, orchards, gardens, lands,
tenements, rents, services, tithes, alterages, oblations, obventions, and all other
its possessions and hereditaments, spiritual and temporal.”

1604.—10th May. The Priory or late House of Observant Friars near Yoghall,
called the Black Friarsof Yoghall with all their Poses spiritual and temporal,
was granted to Sir Richard Boyle—{Calendar of Patent Rolls, Jac. I.]

1617.—The Lady Honor FitzGerrald of the Geraldine Family, presented the
Dominicans of Youghal, with a silver-gilt Shrine for the Image of the Madonna in
their possession. This relique is about 4 inches in height, by 1 in width. Its sides

