--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-245.png ---
County of Donegall. 213

Rathene ; a church in the diocess of Raphoe, and commonly
called Rathnanepscop; St. Aid Glass fixed his residence here,
where his festival is observed on the 16th of February ;™ and
the feast of St. Fidmunius of Raithen, brother to St. Fidhar-
leus, who flourished A.D. 750, is observed here on 16th of
May.? :

Rathmullin ;* a small town on Loughswilley, in the barony
of Kilmacrenan. An house was built here for Carmelites, or

™ Vard, p.158. "Calendar.

%® Rathmullan has still its monastery standing, and in tolerable order, thus form-
ing an exception to the rule of thorough ‘‘ rooting up” which has been pursued, as
we have seen with vandal effect towards the fine old historic ecclesiastical estab-
lishments of Tirconnell. The monastery of Rathmullan was a Carmelite priory ;
it exhibits some fine specimens of pointed Gothic architecture. and over its eastern
window there is a figure of St. Patrick, large and in a very good state of preserva-
tion. Adjoining the priory are the remains of a strongly-built castle, and in one
of its gables a slab is inserted with the armorial bearings of the family of the Mac
Swines, or Mac Swineys, sculptured on it, showing thereby this to be the ances-
tral castle of that family, once powerful in those parts. In 1618, or thereabouts,
Turlogh Oge Mac Swine was compelled to deliver up possession of this castle, and
manor attached, to Dr. Knox, who had been then appointed Protestant bishop of
Raphoe. Dr. Knox repaired it, and introduced many improvements, with the
view of turning it into an episcopal palace. The present is a solid building, and
entirely built after the Elizabethan style of architecture. The town itself does not
possess any of its ancient importance, a thing to be deplored, for there is no more
charming situation than that of Rathmullan, on the edge of Lough Swilly’s
pleasant shore. Two of the most deeply interesting incidents in the history of

irconnell occurred here, and thus added to the fame of Rathmullan. Towards
the end of the sixteenth century there was growing up in Tirconnella prince, ‘‘ whose
youth and renown,” say the Four Masters, ‘spread through the five provinces of
Ireland, even before he had arrived at the age of manhood, for his goodly growth,
wisdom, sagacity, and noble deeds, and the people in general used to say that he
was really the prophesied one.” This was Hugh Roe, heir presumptive to the
throne of Tirconnell—his father, then an old man, being the reigning chieftain.
Sir John Perrot, the then Lord Deputy of Ireland, determined to get possession of
the young prince, and with this view had a ship fitted up and well stored with
Spanish wines. The vessel sailed round from Dublin, and put into Lough Swilly,
in which neighbourhood the young O’Donnell was staying with his foster-father,
MacSwyne-na-Thua, and the crew, representing themselves as Spanish traders,
opened a traffic in wines with the people on the shore. The scheme succeeded.

ugh Roe and some young companions coming into the neighbourhood of Rath-
mullan, were invited by MacSwyne of Fanad, the lord of the castle at Rathmullan,
to an entertainment in which they should try the quality of the wine newly im-
ported. A messenger was sent from the castle for a good supply, but word was
sent back by the captain that all the wine they had for sale had been disposed of ; if,
however, the noble company at the castle would condescend to visit the ship, he
should take it as a great honour to treat them to the choicest samples in his stock.
There was no need to press the warm invitation.

‘« The generous prince, Red Hugh,
Unguarded quits the fortress walls and stands amidst the crew.
Down with the hatches, set the sails, we have won the wished-for prize;
Above the rebel’s prison-cell to-morrow’s sun shall rise,
Untasted foams the Spanish wine, the board is spread in vain ;
The hand that waved a welcome forth is shackled by a chain ;
Yet faster, faster through the deep, the vessel glideth on—
Tirconnell's towers like phantoms fade, the last faint trace is gone.”

