--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-265.png ---
County of Down. 233

Inquisition 5th November, tst King James, finds that
William O’Dorman was the last abbot ; and that Ist February,
23nd King Henry VIII. he was seized of the townlands of

St. Malaehy was born, proves, beyond doubt, that the church erected by the saint
was considered by the people a novelty, not because it was built of stone, but
because it presented a magnificence to which they had not been accustomed. From
the frequency of entries of churches and monasteries having been consumed by
fire, there can be no doubt that the Irish, like all people occupying a wooded
country, did utilise their forests by constructing of wood most of their buildings ;
but it admits of as little doubt that many of those structures were made of stone.
At the same year in which the annals record the death of Ua Mathghamna, or
O'Mahony, they cite, in reference to the death of an ecclesiastic, the following
poem, incidentally descriptive of one of those wooden structures :—

“ Dubhthach (Duffy), a strict, austere man,
Who made the roomy, cheap abode,
The friend of souls, thou seest, has obtained heaven
In exchange for his fair, thin-boarded domicile.”

Weare told by St. Bernard, in the life of his friend, St. Malachy, that Bangor
had been destroyed by pirates, and 900 monks are reported to have been killed
by them in one day. Though there is not, in the native annals, any account of
this fearful slaughter, yet they record that Bangor was several times plundered ;
and at 956 we have seen that Tanaidh Maguire, the abbot, was slain. It is pro-
bable that on this occasion many of the monks were put to death, and, perhaps,
we may thence date the devastation spoken of by St. Bernard. The obits of the
abbots are not recorded with that regularity which characterised the previous
period, from which we may infer that the abbatical records either were not kept,
or became the prey of the invaders. In the days of St. Malachy the monastery was
waste, yet the lands belonging to it were then in the possession of its erenachs, or
church-farmers. These were the heads of the respective clans, in which the
abbey lands had been originally vested under the Brehon laws. Generally
speaking, the erenach clans were the descendants of the persons who gave the
original site. They were bound to pay certain rents to the abbey. and to perform
other specified duties. They looked up to the erenach as their chief, and he
received his appointment from the abbot; but, by the provisions of the Brehon
code, the abbot was restricted in his selection to the clan. In one word, the suc-
cession to the erenachy seems to have been determined by the general law, which
regulated the succession to the chieftainship of any of the various toparchies. The
erenach who was in possession of the land in the time of St. Malachy,
was a maternal uncle of that saint. He consented to surrender the lands
and the site of the monastery to St. Malachy; but the Saint was satis-
fied with the site, and the lands passed to another erenach, for the old man
resigned the office and became a monk in Bangor. St. Malachy, taking
with him about ten monks, set about erecting a handsome oratory, constructed of
wood, and re-established the ancient discipline. Our saint then proposed to build
a stone church, beautiful in design and ornament, but the son of the new erenach,
probably fearing that a large portion of the expenses must devolve on his father, in
accordance with the provisions of the recognised code that then regulated the re-
ciprocal duties of erenach and ecclesiastic. excited the people against the under-
taking, and, proceeding at their head to the building, thus addressed the saint :—
*€O good man! what hath induced you to introduce such a novelty into our
country? Weare not Galls, but Scots. Whence this levity? What need have
we of a building so useless and splendid?” Shortly after this, various misfortunes
befel the family of the erenach.* His son died, and he himself becoming

* He was brother to Christian, who afterwards became abbot of Melifont. The
erenachs of Bangor, at that time, seem to have belonged to the family now calling
themselves Gilmore.—Another branch of the same people, calling themselves
M‘Gillmurray and Murray, are stil! numerous in Killinchey.


