--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-149.png ---
County of Cork. 123

1355. Another liberate issued on 4th of May for the pay-
ment of the same pension."

1381. Edmund Mortimer, Earl of March and Ulster, and
Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, died in this monastery on the
26th of December,* and John Colton, being appointed Lord
“Justice, took the oath of office in this house, on the following
day.

* King, p. 87. *Cox,vol.1,p. 135. *War. Bps. p. 84.

ordered the image of St. Dominic to be dragged from ‘the Abbey of the
Isle” to the High Cross of the City, where it was publicly committed to the
flames, and burnt to ashes, amidst the tears of the persecuted Catholic citizens.

At the commencement of the reign of James I., the Friars began to repair
their convent and church. Religious persecution soon stopped the work of resto-
rationin the old Catholic churches and abbeys. In 1616 we find a it made
a mu John King, of the church, steeple, monastery, &c., of St. Dominic, in

‘ork.

A middle chapter of the Fathers of the Irish Dominican Province, was held
in the Convent of Cork, at which Father James O’Hurly, subsequently Bishop of
Emly, presided, which is specially noticed in the Acts of the General Chapter of
Rome, in 1644. Several of the Friars there assembled, became soon after illus-
trious as bishops and martyrs for the faith in the time of persecution.

Father John O’Morrogh, a distinguished preacher in this convent, is said, in the
Annals of the Order, to have flourished about the year 1640.

1642. The Dominican Order completely restored in Ireland. There were
flourishing, in the short interval of peace for the Catholic Church, 43 houses, and 600
Friars of the order of St. Dominic.

1644. The Catholics expelled from Cork, by order of Lord Inchiquin.

The year 1647 was marked by the glorious martyrdom of Father Richard Barry,
a Cork Dominican, then Prior of Exchel, who, having valiantly stood up for
the defence of the sanctuary in the Cathedral of Cashel, and refused to accept his
life, on condition of stripping himself of his religious habit, and assuming a
secular dress, was condemned to be burned alive on the summit of the Rock of
Cashel, and having heroically suffered in the flames for the space of two hours,
was transfixed through the side with a sword. Four days after, when the Parlia-
mentary forces had retired, the Vicar-General, with the Notary Apostolic, Henry
O’Callanan, having judicially examined the proofs of his martyrdom, conveyed his
sacred remains in solemn procession and with joyful anthems to the beautiful
cloister ee his Convent, where, perhaps, they are reposing undisturbed to the

resent day.

“ In-1648, Dominic de Burgo, a young professed member of the Order of Preachers,
and near relative of the Earl of Clanricarde, was made prisoner on hoard of the
ship in which he had taken his passage to Spain, to pursue his studies. He was
thrown into prison at Kinsale, whence he le his escape by jumping from the top
of the gaol wall down on the sea-shore. For two days he lay concealed in a neigh-
bouring wood, all covered with mud, without clothing, fc or drink. At length
he found shelter under the hospitable roof of the Roches in that neighbourhood,
probably of Garrettstown. He was, at a later period of life, the celebrated Bishop
of Elphin, for whose head or capture the government offered a large reward, and
to whom Oliver Plunket, the martyred Archbishop of Armagh, wrote from his
dungeon, warning him of the attempts of the Privy Council against his life. He
died in exile

In 1651, Father Eneas Ambrose O’Cahil, an eloquent preacher, and zealous
missionary in Cork, being recognised as a Friar of a Dominican community, was
rushed upon by a troop of Cromwell's soldiers, cut to pieces with their sabres, and
his limbs were scattered about to be trampled under foot. At this time, indeed,
a most furious Pereenno taged, the effects of which, on the condition of the Domi-
nican Order in Ireland, are thus described in one of the Acts of the General Chapter
held in Rome A.D. 1656:—“ An abundant harvest of those who in our Irish

