--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-307.png ---
County of Down. 271

government of the latter it was given to the Cistertian order,
and made a daughter of the abbey of Furnes. At the con-
quest of Ulster, Sir John de Courcey“totally destroyed this
house, it having been converted into a fortification against
him; but, in atonement for this act of sacrilege, he founded
an abbey in his island of Inis-Courcey, which see.*

£ynes * King Henry IV,, on the 1st of May, 1411, made a
grant to Thomas Chenele of the alien priory of Eynes, in the
Ardes ; and to hold the same so long as it should remain in
the king’s hands, it having been seized on account of the war
between England and France! This priory might probably
have stood at Abbacy, near the Lough of Strangford, in the
barony of Ardes, a bishop’s lease, and late the seat of Charles
Echlin, esq.™

Glangragh ,* or the Vale of Charity; in the year 1200 an
abbey was founded here, which was a daughter of the abbey
of Swiry, of the line of Clariveaux. We owe this information
to Allemande, who founds his authority on that of Jungelin ;
and he says further, that some place it in the territory of
Meath, and diocess of Killoom, or Clonmacnoise ; conse-
quently it is in the King’s county.

Gray Abbey ;* on the Lough of Strangford, in the barony
of Ardes. This monastery, under the invocation of the Virgin

® Hist. County of Down, p.24. 1 A Pat. Roll in Birmingham Tower, No. 6, inter.
ffarris’s Collect. vol. 4. ™ Hist. County of Down, p. 47.

20 Eynes.—Dr. Reeves writes—‘ Harris (Hist. Down, p. 47), and after him
archdall (Monast. Hib. p. 120), conjectured that this Abbacy was the site of the
alien priory of ‘ Eynes in the Ardes,’ of which mention is made in a Patent Roll,
12 Hen. IV. (see Cal. Canc. Hib. p. 197, Harris’ MSS., vol. iv., p. 178) ; but
erroneously, for the priory in question was none other than the Black Abbey,
which was a cell of St. Mary’s of Lonley, in Normandy, and was the only alien
pricey in the diocese. The name ‘ Eynes’ was probably borrowed from the neigh-

ouring church of Inishargy, of which Black Abbey was parson.”—Ecc. Antiq.,
p. 22. The ruins of the ancient Church of Inishargy stand on high ground, and
industry has converted into arable ground the morass which once surrounded it.

%\ Glangragh.—Not in the county of Down.

Grey Abbey.—The following note is from Reeves’ Eccl. Antiq., p. 92:—
‘A.D, 1193.—Conditur monasterium de Jugo Dei, Whit Abbey, Hibemice
Monesterlech” [ A/ainisterliath, ‘Grey Abbey '].—Grace’s Annals. ‘Johannes
quidem de Cursi habuit filiam Godredi [regis Manniae], nomine Affrecam, in
matrimonium, quae fundavit Abbatiam Sanctae Mariae de Jugo Dei, quae ibidem
sepulta est.’—Chronicon Manniae, A.D. 1204. This Abbey was sometimes called
simply Leigh, from Liat,‘ grey.’ It-was a cell of Holm Cultram in Cumberland,
and its connexion with that house is thus illustrated by the Chronicle of Maibros :
©1222, Dominus Adam Abbas de Holmcultram suo cessit officio ; cui successit
Dominus Radulfus Abbas de Yugo Dei in Hibernia: loco cujus substitus est in
Hibernia Dominus Johannes Cellerarius de Glenlus.’ ‘1237, Obiit Dominus
Gillebertus Abbas de Holmcultram apud Cantuariam, dum rediret de capitulo
generali. Cui successit Dominus Johannes Abbas de Yugo Dei. Et de Jugo Dei
pastoralem curam suscepit Nicholaus ejusdem domus Prior..—(Rer. Angl. Script.,
vol. i, and Bannatyne Club Papers). The ruins of the Abbey are the most
extensive ecclesiastical remains in the diocese, and have been secured against

