--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-215.png ---
County of Galway. 189

1167. Died the comorb Gildagorius O’Dubhagain.4
1334. The isles of Arran.and Bophin were plundered and
burnt, and hostages were taken from thence by Sir John

@ Act. SS. p. 715.

and gentle face—seeking to cross over to the island ; and so frequently was the
journey made, that the words of the prophet seemed verified, and even in that
trackless sea ‘a path and a way was there, and it was called the holy way.’ The
ilgrims were men of every period of life, some in the spring of their youth,
fying from the pleasures that wooed their senses, and the earthly loves that laid
snares for their hearts; others inthe vigour of healthful manhood ; and others
ed and infirm, who came to close in religious peace the remnant of their days,
which at their best they had accounted as few and evil. And thus Aran gradually
came to be, as the writer of the Life of St. Kieran of Clonmacnoise describes it,
the home of a multitude of holy men, and the sanctuary where repose the relics
of countless saints, whose names are known only to the Almighty God. ‘Great
indeed is that island,’ exclaims another ancient writer, ‘and it is the land of
a saints, for no one, save God alone, knows how many holy men lie buried
rein.

. “ But, although it is not possible to learn the names of all the saints who were
formed to holiness by St. Enda in Aran, our ancient records have preserved the
names of a few at least out of that blessed multitude. Among them we find
almost every name of note that appears in the second part of the well-known
list of the saints of Ireland, and in addition to these many others of great
celebrity who are not included in that catalogue. The history of these men is
the history of St. Enda’s work on Aran. First among St. Enda’s disciples must
be ed St. Kieran, the founder of Clonmacnoise, who has been styled by
Alcuin the glory of the Irish race. St. Kieran came to Aran in his youth, and
for seven years lived faithfully in the service of God, under the direction of St.
Enda. His youth and strength fitted him in an especial manner for the active
duties, which were by no means inconsiderable in so large a community, and in
a place where the toil spent on an ungrateful soil was so scantily repaid. ‘ During
these seven years,’ says the ancient life of our saint, ‘ Kieran so diligently dis-
charged the duties of grinding the corn, that grdin in quantity sufficient to make
a heap never was found in the granary of the island.’ Upon these humble
labours the light of the future greatness of the founder of Clonmacnoise was
allowed to shine in visions, St. Kieran had a vision which he faithfully narrated
to his master, St, Enda. He dreamed that on the banks of the Shannon he saw
a mighty tree laden with leaves and fruits, which covered with its shade the entire
island of Erin. This dream he narrated to St. Enda, who said, ‘the tree laden
with fruit, thou art thyself, for thou shalt be great before God and man, and shalt
bring forth sweetest fruits of good works, and shalt be honoured throughout all
Ireland. Proceed, therefore,at once, and in obedience to the will of God, build thou
there a monastery.’ Upon this, St. Kieran, prepared himself for the building of
the monastery of Clonmacnoise. His first step was to receive the priesthood. But
he could not bring himself to sever the happy ties that bound him to his abbot.
He still longed to be under his guidance, and when recommending himself to
the prayers of his brethren, he said to St. Enda, in the presence of all, ‘O Father,
take me and my charge under thy protection, that all my disciples may be thine
likewise.’ ‘Not so,’ answered fete, ‘for it is not the will af God that you
should all live under my care in this scanty island ; but to thee, for thine admirable
humility and perfect charity, will Christ the Lord grant the half of Ireland as
the portion of thine inheritance.’ And when they had thus spoken, a cross was set
up in the Place, in sign of the brotherhood they had contracted between them-
selves, and those who were to come after them; and they said: ‘whosoever in
after times shall break the loving bond of this our brotherhood, shall not have
share in our love on earth, nor in our company in heaven.’

“*The love which St. Enda bore towards his holy pupil for his many and
wonderful virtues, made their parting singularly painful to them both. For a
me the holy abbot felt as if the angels of God were leaving Aran with Kieran,

