--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-206.png ---
180 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

opposite to the bay of Galway; the principal of them was
called Aranmore.

Inquisition 11th April, 1581, finds, that these islands called
Arrynmore, Inishmine, and Inisherye, were parcel of the pos-

“In the third island of Aran :—1. The church of Kill-Choemhain, dedicated to
St. Colman, and in which also he is venerated. 2. The church consecrated to St.
Paul. 3. The church called Kill-gradh-an Domhain, in which St. Gobnata is
venerated on the 11th of February. In this island there was formerly a celebrated
monastery called Kill-Cholmain, in which St. Colman was venerated on the 12th of
June, from which also the island itself is sometimes called Ara-cholmain.”

Half a century later O’Flaherty, in his description of West Connaught (pub-
lished by Hardiman for the I. A.S., in 1846) gave a more detailed account of some
ot the holy places of Aran, from which a few extracts will suffice :-—“ The isles of
Aran are famous for the multitude of saints there living of old and interred, or
there trained in religious austerity and propagating monastic discipline in other
parts ; venerable for many sacred churches, chapels, wells, crosses, sepulchres, and
other holy relics of saints still there extant as monuments of their piety;
reverenced for many rare privileges of sacred places therein, and the instant divine
punishments inflicted on such as dare violate or profane them ; frequently visited by
oe in pilgrimage for devotion, acts of penance, and miraculous virtues there
wrought.

‘*Aranmore, the greatest of these islands, contains twenty-four quarters of land,
and is twenty-four miles in compass; wherein, on the south side, stands Dun-
Engus, a large fortified place on the brim of a high cliff (this fortress of the Belgic
colonists, dating from the first century of the Christian era, is styled by Petrie one
of the most magnificent barbaric monuments now remaining in Europe). This
island was inhabited by infidels out of Corcomroe, in the County of Clare, when
St. Enda got it by donation of Engus, Kigg of Munster, about the year 480. He
there Jaid the first foundation of Christian piety, and sowed that small grain of
mustard seed which so increased, that this island was called Aran of the Saints.
The Life of St. Kieran of Clonmacnoise thus expresseth the infinite number of
saints in that island in his own time :—‘In qua multitudo sanctorum virorum
manet, et innumerabiles sancti omnibus incogniti nisi soli Deo omnipotenti, ibi
jacent.’ The like expression is to be found in the Life of St. Ailbhe of Emly :—
“ Magna est illa insula et est terra sanctorum ; quia nemo scit numerum sanctorum
qui sepulti sunt ibi, nisi solus Deus.’ St. Enda, son of Conall Dearg, of the
noble Oirghiellian family in Ulster, and brother-in-law, by his sister, to King
Engus of Munster, followed the evangelical precept, forsaking a rich patrimony
for Christ, and his merits brought him to be abbot beyond seas in Italy, before he
came with one hundred and fifty religious persons to Aran, where he lived to his
decrepit age, being upwards of fifty-eight years in the island ; for St. Kieran of
Clonmacnoise lived nine years under his discipline and left in the year 538. His
successors, abbots of Aran, continued, I suppose, to the time of the suppression
of abbeys. The last of whom I find recorded was Donatus {O’Leyn, Abbot of
Aran, in the year 1400, The memory of St. Gregory the Great, kept in this
island, was doubtless because he was much reverenced of old in Ireland, and
honoured with the title of golden mouth, as Cumianus writes in his letter about
the year 634, by which name he is known to this day in Irish. Near the Castle
of Arkin was St. Enna’s church and an abbey of St. Francis, both demolished for
building the citadel in Cromwell’s time. Not far from thence, to the east, isa
small chapel of St. Enda, wherein Sir Morogh O'Flaherty, of Bunowan, was buried,
A.D. 1666. Outside this chapel, north-east, is the churchyard where anciently
were one hundred and twenty graves of saints, in one of which St. Enda was
buried, where the stone laid over him is as yet to be seen, together with diverse other
tombstones still extant (now, however, covered with the sand). Here numerous
saints interred, as in other parts of the island, rest in peace, till the day of gen-
eral resurrection, There is on the east side of this island Portdoibhche, 3.¢.,
Portus Dolii, mentioned in St, Enda's Life,now corruptly Port-eiche; and in each
of the two other islands is Trach-na-neach, or Tract-each, #.¢., the Horse’s-shore,

