--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-236.png ---
210 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland,

Franciscan Friary }© A.D. 1296. Sir William de Burgh,
surnamed Leigh, or the Grey, founded a monastery for Fran-
ciscan friars in St. Stephen’s Island, situated without the north
gate of the town, as it is particularly mentioned in the obi-
tuary of the said friary,* and the dedication of it was on the
16th of May.* Sir William died the 12th of February, A.D.
1324, and was interred here.>

* War. Ms. vol. 34; Lodge, vol.ii., Append. * King, p. 313. > Lodge, Lib. Obit,

the estates in the country. In this year the expedition of Jamaica was set on
foot. Ten thousand went thither under the command of Colonel Venables.

“ The Protector Oliver, after his great and fortunate victory, allowed the whole
town, for the most part, to fall into decay. About this time you might see whole
families destroyed, and streets not having six families ; and soldiers or poor
bakers, that ought to content themselves with one cellar, had great houses to live
in till they burned all the lofts, and wainscots, and partitions thereof, and then
removed to another house till they made an end of all the town, and left them full
of excrement and filth ; so that it was poison to enter into any of the said houses,
formerly fit to lodge kings or princes, being the completest and best fittedin all Ire-
land. e inhabitants thereof, being the best and greatest merchants in the
kingdom, for hospitality, liberality, and charity, both at home and abroad,
accompanied with good education, were now in the midst of frost and snow,
lying in hedges, in smoky and miserable huts, and barracks in the country, being
all removed except six families, who were forced to quarter the most of the
soldiers of the town, and to excessive tributes and bribes, but were at turned
out with the rest. The clergy, being about fifty in number, were sent to Arran
and Boffin, where they were almost starved, being allowed but 2d. per diem, and
even that not paid, and strict proclamation was made against the lives and goods
of such as would entertain any cle! . The images of our Blessed ly
and of other saints were burned, chalices were made common cups to drink out
of, priests’ vestments were made secular clothes of.

A.D. 1657. ‘‘In this year the abbey of Galway, belonging to St. Francis’s
Order, was demolished : best built by Sir William Burke.”

18 The following interesting account of this friary was written by F. Mooney,
O.S.F., in 1616. Having referred to its foundation by William de Burgh, sur-
named Liagh, #.¢., the Grey, he thus continues :—‘‘ The illustrious founder spared
no expense to render this monastery one of the finest in Ireland ; and, indeed, the
spacious dimensions of its church, the rich marble of which it was con-
structed, and the splendour of its altars, are so many irrefragable evidences of the
piety and taste of the noble De Burgh. He lived to see it solemnly consecrated,
and when dying ordered that his remains should be laid in the gorgeous monu-
ment which he caused to be built for himself and his posterity, right under the
shadow of the grand altar. When I visited Galway, the tomb of the founder, like
those of most of the chief families of the neighbourhood, was in good preservation,
but particularly that of De Burgh, round whose recumbent effigy I read the follow-
ing inscription : ‘AMemoriae Illmi. Domini Gul. de Burgo, Suae Nationis principis
et hujus monasterii fundatoris gus obit 1324. The endowments which De Burgh
made to this monastery were very numerous, and consisted of water-mills upon
the river, and the tithes of some acres of arable land near the city ; and that our
friars should never lack fish, he ordained that on every Wednesday they should be
supplied with one salmon out of the great weir, on every Saturday with three out
of the Aigh weir, and on the same day with one out of the haul-net, and with all
na eels that might be taken one day in each week out of the many eel weirs on
the river.

“I may say, unhesitatingly, that the Galway monastery had as many bene-
factors as any other house of our order in Ireland ; for, indeed, the inhabitants of that
ancient city loved our habit, and never tired of contributing to the maintenance of
our brethren. The largesses of the rich and noble helped to keep the buildings in
good repair, and the poor man was ever ready with his mite to promote the same

