--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-194.png ---
168 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

situation ; but before the completion of the building, the
destroying powers of King Henry VIII. overwhelmed it in the
year 1530.*

By several Inquisitions, it appears that this abbey was
possessed of Drumcion, two tates; Gortret, one tate ; Colkie,
three tates ; Grangeth, three tates ; Lifredy, two tates ; Cap-
poge, one tate ; Lanchall, two tates ; Drumkeen, two tates ;
Moyleat, four tates ; all of the ancient measure, with their
tithes, in the County of Fermanagh. They had six quarters
of land, containing twenty-four tates, each tate being thirty
acres of this country measure, with the tithes thereof, and
certain liberties, payable out of the lands of Ballynasagard,
all in this county.‘

Temple Mullin (a chapel of ease), in the parish of Boghae,
and barony of Clonawley, in M‘Garrahan’s country, paying
yearly to the abbot five gallons of butter and an axe;
and also the rectory and vicarage of the parish of Rossierrie,
in same barony, were appropriated to the abbey ; one-fourth
part of the tithes did belong to the Bishop of Clogher
(excepting only the tithes of Ballinbort), and the other three
parts were the property of the abbot ; a moiety of the tithes
of Ballinbort was appropriated to the use of the parson of
Iniskeen, one-fourth part to the vicar of Rosberry, the half of
the last fourth part to the Bishop of Clogher, and the remain-
ing half to the abbot." The chapel, and grange of Bally
M'‘Mataggart, containing one tate of the new measure (which
is two tates of the old measure), together with the tithes of
the same; the lands of the sept of Munteraran, paid annually
to the abbot four meathers of butter and five of barley, each
meather to contain six quarters ; and it also paid 6s. for the
tithes of said lands, and 2s. yearly to the bishop. These,
together with the site, &c., of the monastery, a small church,
and cemetery, and certain tofts, gardens, and closes adjoining,
containing three acres, were granted to Sir John Davis,
Knight.”

Lough Uva ;*® An abbey was founded here in the year
500.% It is now unknown.

* King, p. 319. tid. " Jd. p.202. ¥ Id. p. 319. * Conry.

13 Loch Uva.—This is incorrectly placed in Fermanagh by Archdall. It was near
Drumlease, in the County of Leitrim, where St. Patrick had erected a church.

The Four Masters, at 811 [recte, 816], record the death of Nuadha of Loch-
Uamha, Bishop, Anchorite, and Abbot of Ard-macha. Colgan gives a short but
meagre life of him at 19th February ( Acta Sanctorum, p. 373). He was abbot
of this place, and in 808 succeeded Torbach in the primacy of Armagh, and made
@ primatial visit of Connaught in 810 (recte, 815). O'Donovan, when annotating
the Annals, at the year 811, was unable to identify Loch-Uamha, ‘‘ the lake of
the cave,” but in his Addenda, vol. ii., p. 1193, states it to be a small lake, con-

taining twenty acres, between the townlands of Fawn and Mullagh, and in
process of draining when he wrote.

