--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-257.png ---
County of Kerry. 229

St. Brendan erected a sumptuous monastery here in the 6th
century.!

A.D. 1089. The abbey and town were destroyed by fire.™

1151. It was again reduced to ashes by the hands of Cormac
O’Culen ®

1179. The abbey and town suffered the same fate, when,
as is supposed, St. Brendan’s abbey was wholly demolished.

In the year 1253, Thomas, Lord of Kerry, founded a

1 Act. SS. p. 89. © Tr. Th. p. 633. 2 Annal. Annon. ° Annal. Munst.
Contin.
sium ortus fuit." We may translate this sentence :—‘‘ He was born in a district
of Munster called Annagh,” for this old Irish name, which means a marsh, pre-
cisely corresponds with the Latin Stagui/e. Close to Tralee there is still a parish
which bears the name of Annagh.

The name of St. Brendan occurs in all our ancient Martyrologies, and his feast
is invariably marked on the 16th of May. Thus, St. AEngus in the Fe/éré on that
day :—

«¢The summons of Brendan of Cluain
Into the victorious eternal Kingdom,”

and the gloss adds :—‘‘ #e., the calling of Brendan of Clonfert to the Kingdom of
God.” The Martyrology of Tullaght has, on the same day :—" Brendini Cluana
Ferta.” Marianus O'Gorman devotes one line to his memory :—* Brendan, with-
out a particle of pride.” The AMartyrology of Donezal has a long notice of our
saint on the r6th of May, and styles him ‘‘ Abbot of Cluainferta-Brenainn.”
The Martyrology of Christ Church. published by Dr. Todd, has also, * Sanctus
Brendanus, Abbas et Confessor.” Selbhach. in his ‘‘ Metrical List of the Saints
of Inisfail,” thus commemorates SS. Brendan and Mochuda :—

« Brendan, son of fair Findlug,
And Mochuda. son of Findall,
A holy pair, with penitential countenances,
Of the race of Ciar son of Fergus.”

The very ancient Catalogue of Saints ‘who were similar in their manner of
life.” preserved in the cok of Leinster, unites together ‘* St. Thomas the Apostle
and St. Brendan of Clonfert.” St. Cuimin of Connor also, in his poem on the
characteristic virtues of the Saints of Lreland, devotes a strophe to our saint :—

‘* Brendan loved perretual mortification,
According to his syno:l and his flock ;
Seven years he spent on the great whale’s back ;
It was a distressing m de of mortification.”

Some writers have supposed that St. Brendan was Bishop as we!l as Abbot ;
and indeed the silence of the ancient Martyrologies would not of itself be sufficient
to refute that opinion. For instsnce. O'Clery, in the Afartrrology of Donegal,
merely styles our saint an Abbot; yet, in the Sook of Genealogies (St. /sidore's
AI.SS.) expressly calls him “ Brenoin Eashace,” that is, “ Bishop Brendan.” The
fragment, however, of the Book of Leinster. preserved among the St Isidore’s
M.SS., sets this question for ever at rest. It gives us a short but invaluable Tract,
ascribed to St. Aingus, which divides the saints of Ireland. according to their re-
spective orders, as Bishops Priests, and Deacons. Now, it is among the Priests
that it marks both St. Brendan of Birr and St. Brendan mac hu Alta, that is, the
great patron of Kerry and Clonfert, of whom we treat.

The Sees of Ardfert and Clonfert honour St. Brendan as their patron. Innu-
merable places in various parts of Ireland bear his name, and several churches are


