--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-244.png ---
218 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

St. Conall was Abbot of Kilchonail, in the territory of
Mainech, or Hy-Maine,* in the time of St. Patrick. The
existence of this abbey was but short, which the vulgar impute
to a denunciation pronounced by that saint ;! it is now a vicar-
age, in the diocese of Clonfert. A monastery for Franciscan

» The north part of the County of Galway, and the fourth part of the County 9
Roscommon — The Siete were Kings of the tke i Meh SS: p. 632. mad

finely-cut stone, and that both were covered with a roof of wood made to resemble
tiles. Within the church are seven altars; and all the internal decorations,
whether in stone or wood, are admirably wrought. The sacred edifice is sur-
mounted by a lofty tower, and, strange to say, its sweet-toned bell is still there,
notwithstanding the rapacity of the lish Protestants, who seldom spare such
things. In a word, I Pond, the church in excellent condition ; the stained glass
of the windows unbroken, the pictures uhdefaced, and the sculptured work unmu-
tilated. With the six poor friars who still clung to the place, I sang the office in
choir—nay, and preached to vast crowds, so vast that the church could not contain
them all. It would seem that a special Providence watched over Kilconnell, to
save it from the destruction which had fallen on nearly all our other houses,
although it stood in a most Spee position, and was frequently head-quarters of
English regiments during the Elizabethan war. Indeed, from time to time it was
garrisoned by whole companies, who messed and lit fires within the very church ;
and yet, strange to say, it sustained little or no injury from such guests. Among
those who were quartered there was Sir Richard Bingham, the Governor of Con-
naught, whose inhuman treatment of the native Irish so shocked even Queen
Elizabeth herself, that she was obliged to dismiss him from that high office in
1595, and summon him to London to answer the charges of cold-blooded murders
which were preferred against him by the Burkes and others. That heartless
miscreant sailed round Tirconnell, and with his ship’s crew plundered the defence-
Neless nuns of the Carmelite Convent of Rathmullen, of vestments, chalices, and all
their other valuables. Another time he and his brother George, subsequently
slain by Ulick Burke, swept with fire and sword the island of Tory, demolishing
its crosses and oratories, which stood there since the days of Columb Kill. Never-
theless, incredible as it may seem, this very Bingham behaved kindly to the friars
of Kilconnell, where he used to keep his head-quarters. In fact, he gave strict
orders to his officers and men to see that the church and the monastery should
sustain no injury at their hands—nay, he summoned some of the friars to his
Presence, and exhorted them to do all in their power to keep the buildings in good
Te]

“In the year 1596, too, during the Presidency of Sir Conyers Clifford, Kil-
connell was once more turned into a barrack for English soldiers, after they had
been signally defeated by O’Donnell and O’Neill in various engagements. On
this latter occasion the English garrisoned the monastery with not less than fifteen
companies. Now, it so happened that one of the English officers then stationed
there had a horse of which fe was very fond, and he determined to stable it within
the very chancel, hard by the steps of St. Francis’s altar, where he caused hay and
straw to be laid for the brute. Heaven, however, it would seem, resented this
outrage; for on the next morning the valuable charger was found stark dead,
though sound and strong the night before. Even the very companions of this
Captain Rynck, for such was his name, admitted that this was a just judgment on
his impiety. Nevertheless, the English soldiers forced open the tombs of the
princes and ‘chieftains buried in the church, thinking that they would light on
concealed treasure ; nor did they desist from these outrages till one of them had
his legs fractured by the falling of a huge mass of stone.

‘‘Thave nothing more to add to this narrative, except that the monastery of
Kilconnell has been granted to one Callthorp and other English settlers, and that the
cruel ordinance of Queen Elizabeth, commanding ‘houses freight with friars’ to be
suppressed, and ‘made fit habitations for Englishmen,’ is now being carried out
to the letter.” See Father Mechan’s *‘ Franciscan Monasteries.”

