--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-177.png ---
County of Fermanagh. 153

Next to the tower is a vaulted building of hewn stone,
which ends in a point, and is called St. Molaise’s house ; near
to this is his bed, in the shape of a stone coffin, in which he
used to pray. The neighbouring inhabitants say, that pains
in the back are relieved by lying in this bed.

‘* Beatissimus Lasreanus ad aquilonalem partem Hiberniae exivit, et construxit
clarissimum monasterium in stagno Herne, nomine Daimhinis qui sonat latine
Bovis insula :” and again: “ regebat plures monachos in insula posita in stagno Ere,
quam Scoti nominant Daimhinis, id est, Bovium insulam.” The ruins of the
sacred edifices, which,in early times, adorned this island, are some of the most
interesting in Ireland. Of these the oldest was known as “the House of St.
Molaise.” Within the memory of the present generation it was preserved almost
in a perfect state, and was a small, oblong, stone-roofed structure, with a square-
headed doorway at its western end. Only a few feet of its walls now remain
standing. The walls were of great thickness, built of large stones, in what has
been termed the Cyclopean style. The Round Tower of Devenish is the most
perfect that now remains in Ireland. Its conical cap is still complete, and the
ornamentation on its cornice seems as fresh as it was a thousand years ago. The
“*great church” is all but a featureless ruin. It consisted of a nave and chancel,
with a transept to the south. Its style of architecture and building is much more
modern than that of the Round Tower, and has been referred to the t1th or 12th
century. Many other details connected with the holy well of the saint, and the
font, and the monumental cross, and other antiquities of the island, will be found
in a valuable paper, ‘‘ The Antiquities of Devenish,” contributed by Mr.
‘Wakeman to the Royal Historical and Archzeological Association of Ireland, and
published in its Journal for January. 1874. He remarks that in the general
simplicity of construction, the building known as “ the Devenish House or Oratory
of St. Molaise” is ‘(a remarkable connecting link between what is usually
admitted to be the oldest style of stone church, as found in Ireland, and storeyed
and crossed edifices like the Houses of St. Columba and St. Kevin.” The font,
which once belonged to the Abbey Church. is now preserved in the parish church
at Monea. There is a tradition that the bells of the monastery were thrown into
the lake, in order to preserve them from sacrilegious hands. Mr. Wakeman
inserts in his paper some letters regarding Devenish, written in 1808, which refer
to some interesting features of the island und its ruins, now entirely destroyed.
The church, dedicated to St. Molaise, he describes as 80 feet long and 23 feet
wide. The south aisle is the burial-place of the Maguire family of Tempo;
however, ‘‘ a violent storm, twenty years ago. threw down the entire gable of the
south aisle, and a dreadful hurricane, the 20th of January, 1803, threw down the
top of the upper gable of the above church with several houses, and tore up many
trees from the roots.” He adds, that the structure known as St. Molaisse’s
house, £4 yards from the church, was 30 feet long. and 18 feet wide: it was
covered ou-side with cut stone till one of the Protestant Bishops of Clogher had
it stripped in order to flag the floor of Enniskillen Church.

By the survey of County Fermanagh, 1st James I., it was found that in the
barony of Magheryboy was the ‘‘ monastery or abbey of Channons, in Devenishe,
whereunto belonged in the same barony, 8 tathes (tates) of land, and the tithes of
Ballyosey, and the tithes of 3 half tates of land belonging to the chappel of Collydea,
and that the Prior O’Flanegan possessed this intirely by authoritie from Roome,
and had held it 3 yeres, notwithstanding the king’s majestie was justly entitled to
all the landes, possessions, &c., of this abbey.” It was also found that the parish
church of Devenish * whereunto belonged two quarters of land, were possessed by
Hugh M ‘Hugh Maguir, as corbe ; and that the Chappell of Collydea possessed
3 tates of land, possessed by Rory Ballogh C'’Corcon, as corbe.””

By another Inquisition taken at Eniskilline, 18th September, 1609, it was found
that the Bishop of Clogher was, in right of his bishoprick, entitled out of the
herenagh land of Devenish, containing in all four quarters. of which, so much as lay
in the island of Devenish (excepting Rossimartine, containing a fourth part of a
tate) was free, and belonged to the corbe or chief herenagh of that place, four


