--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-238.png ---
212 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

1494. The friars of this house obtained a licence from Pope
Alexander VI. to annex to the friary the chapel of our Lady,
then adjoining one of the gates of the town.

1494. April the 20th, died Edward Philibyn, who built the
dormitory of this monastery.‘

* Allemande. * War. Ms. vol. 34.

belonged to him, he could not be induced to part with a single perch of it at any
price, no matter how tempting ; and instead of letting it to others, he built there
sundry handsome houses. which accommodate upwards of fifty persons, together with
three water-mills for grinding corn. It was during the construction of the latter
that the weir which formerly belonged to the Franciscans was demolished. From
the earliest times, too, it was customary for all vessels coming up the river with
wood and other sorts of fuel, to give a little of it by way of alms to our friars ; and,
strange as it may seem, this anonymous benefactor still insists on the observance
of the usage, and thus supplies our brotherhood in the city with coal and firewood.
He also maintains the ancient immunities of St. Stephen’s island; so much so,
that he will not allow the mayor to carry his insignia beyond the middle of the
bridge leading to the island, which, in the olden time, marked the limit of munici-
pal jurisdiction in that quarter. Two customs which struck me as very peculiar
ate still observed in the city of Galway, and so remarkable are they that I think
them worth recording. First, almost every one who has anything to leave when
dying, bequeaths a proportionate sum for the preservation and repairs of the mon-
astery ; and secondly, vast numbers of the citizens, ofevery age, sex, and condition,
go each evening at sunset to that venerable old church to pray to God, who, I
doubt not, will one day reward their most edifying piety. 1 have already told you
that, at the time of my visit to Galway, the monastery and church were in excellent
preservation ; but I should not forget to mention, that in 1603, James the First of
England granted both to Sir George Carew and his heirs for ever. Thenceforth
our venerable church was turned into a profane courthouse, where judges, ap-
pointed by Chichester, the Lord Deputy, held assizes for the town and county.
Alas, it was heartrending to witness such desecration ; and the tears fell fast and
hot from my eyes when, on entering the holy edifice, I found it crowded with liti-
gants, the pulpit turned into a witness-box, the choir and chancel adapted to
accommodate a multitude of noisy lawyers, and worst of all, the grand altar trans-
formed into a bench for a bloated judge, who was entirely ignorant of the language
and customs of the people. I have nothing further to add to this meagre account
. of our once splendid monastery of Galway, except that I was not able to ascertain
what became of its altar-plate and rich vestments, all of which had fallen into the
hands of our implacable enemies. A few Franciscans still continue to live in the
house which father Maurice Ultan hired for them in the city, and their zeal is of
the greatest benefit to the townspeoole as well as to those of the suburbs.”

Much controversy has arisen as to the birth-place of the illustrious Archbishop of
Tuam, Dr. Fihely, referred to in these extracts. Cotton writes, that ‘‘ three of the
provinces of Ireland contended for the honour of his birth.”"—Fast#, page 1!._ The
generally received opinion is that of Ware, that he was born in Baltimore, in the
County of Cork, and from that small port-town derived the surname a Portu, by
which he is generally designated in the Annals of the Franciscan order. It is to
be remarked, however, that Ware, in the first edition of his work, wrote that the
Archbishop was said to have been born in the province of Connaught. * Lynch’s
MS., which has only of late come to light, seems to settle the controversy, for it
expressly states that Dr. O’Fihely was born at Clonfert, in the province of Con-
naught. The MS. adds, that the convent of Conventual Franciscans, Kenalthehin,
near Clonfert, was styled for the same reason Conventus de Poriu puro; and thus
the Archbishop derived from that town the surname by which he was known in
his order. Dr. Lynch further writes, that Dr. John de Burgo, who had been
Bishop of Clonfert, and was raised to the Sce of St. Jarlath during the eventful

riod of the Irish Confederation, communicated to him this fact regarding the

irth-place of his illustrious predecessor.

