--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-173.png ---
County of Fermanagh. 149

Devenish ;* An island in Lough-Earn, and one mile and an
half N.W. of Enniskillen.

Regular Canons ; St. Laserian, called also Molaisse, built a
celebrated monastery, under the invocation of the Virgin Mary,

in Daimh-inis, ie. the Ox’s Island. St. Laserian died
September 12th, A.D. 563, and was succeeded by St. Natalis,
son of AEngusius, King of Connaught ; he was also abbot of
Inbernaile, in the County of Donegall, and of Kilnaille in
Breffinia.&

! Usher, p. 498. Act. SS. p.192. © Act. SS. p. 169.

each other in the lake, as also on the neighbouring mainland, are the remains of
remarkable ecclesiastical buildings*-‘One of these islands. called White Island,
contains an old graveyard and the ruins of a church, whilst on Davy’s Island, to
the south, otherwise Inishmore, are the remains of an abbey. Opposite to White
Island, on the mainland, lies the townland of Drumbarna, supposed to be identical
with Drumbarr, commemorated in our Calendars in connexion with the festival of
the ‘* Sons of Ailill.” Here, also in the deerpark attached to the residence of the
Archdall family, are remains of some monastic buildings. The portion of the
townland of Drumbarna extending towards White Island (like so many similar
promontories all along Lough Erne) is locally known by the common Fermanagh
designation of *‘the derry.” Could Derough be merely another form of this word,
so frequent asa place-name on the shores “f the Erne? And if so, could our
author, under the present Derough, have referred to some of the above group of
religious foundations ?

* The Afartyrology of Donegal gives the following notice of St. Molaise on the
12th of September :—* Molaissi, son of Nadfraech, Abbot of Devenish. He was
of the race of Irial, son of Conall Cormach. Monua was the name of his mother,
according to his own Life, chapter fifth. On a certain time as he and his monks
were taking their scanty meal, the refectory took fire and the monks rose up
suddenly to fly from the house. He requested of them to remain, to go on their
knees, and to make prayer ; and he himself did the same, and he reached forth
his hand to the fire, and the ridge-pole of the house fell in, and the fire did them
no further injury than that ; then he permitted the monks to rise from their posture
of prayer. Cuimin, otf Coindeire, states in the poem which begins ‘ Patrick of the
fort of Macha,’ &c., that Molaiss loved to be in a stone prison, and also to keep
a house of hospitality for every one in Erin. Thus he says :—

“** Molaissi, of the lake, loves
To be in a prison of hard stone,
To have a guest-house for the men of Erin,
Without refusal, without a particle of churlishness.’

“The Life of Ciaran of Clonmacnotse states that the order of Molaissi was one
of the eight orders that were in Erin ; but perhaps it speaks of some other saint of
the same name. After completing thirty years, he went to heaven, A.D. 563.
On the 15th of this same month (September) is celebrated the festival and holiday
of Molaissein his own parish and termon at Bealach Mi-Michein, as Brother
Michein testifies.” So far for the Martyrology of Donegal. In the notes is added
the following extract from an ancient office for St. Molaise, who is also called
Laserian, or Lasrean :—“ Antiphona communis. Vir Dei, dum verbum vitae
populo, praedicaret, visus est a terra paululum sublimari, et in aere pendere, et
mirati sunt universi. Oratio. Adesto nobis quaesumus Domine ut beati Lasreani
confessoris tui atque abbatis interventu ab omni inquinatione mundemur mentis
et corporis, per Christum Dominum nostrum.”

The death of St. Molaise, founder of the Monastery of Devenish, is entered in the
Annals of Ulster and of the Four Masters, in 563; and in the Chronicon Scotorum
in 564. There is, however, a second entry in the Annals of Ulster, at the year
571, from which it appears that some ancient authorities referred his demise to

