--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-233.png ---
County of Galway. 207

foundation was long concealed from the Queen, during which
time it was in the hands of Clement Skerryt and Thady
M'‘Inyllis, priests ; its possessions were a church in ruins, a
small cemetery, a garden, and the moiety of an acre of ground,
on which had been erected several cottages, with their yards,
now waste, and therefore of no value, together with a common
of about twenty acres of wet pasture near to the town; the
principal tenants of the college generally grazed their cattle
with the rest of the townsmen ; and twenty-three quarters of
tithes belonging to the said college, viz. :—
QUARTERS.
In the town and chapels of Annagh - -
Cahirnourish =~ - - - -
Bally-Robug = - - - - -
Kyllkoyle - - - - -
Ballynecowley
Drumgriff - - - fa -
Clonlow - - - - - -

Pop AD

The said tithes were valued at £3 6s. Irish.—Inquisition,
28th Queen Elizabeth.

Fallig ; A house was erected here for Grey Friars in the
year 1390, by one Fallig, who, according to Wadding, was an
Trishman.”

Probably Fallig may be erroneously written for Faghy,
which is now a vicarage situated a mile south of Eyrecourt,
in the barony of Longford.

Fidhard ;* St. Patrick built an abbey here, and placed over
it St. Justus.

Colgan informs us, that Fidhard was a parish church in the
diocese of Elphin

Galway ; This town is a remarkable seaport, and sends
representatives to parliament. .

™ King, p. 142, ~ Allemande. * In the territory of Hua Mainech, containing
tart of the County of Galway, and part of the County of Roscommon. ¥ Tr. Th.
Op. 136 and 177.

14 O'Flaherty, writing towards the close of the 17th century (in West Connaught,
age 30), describes Galway as ‘‘the chief town of the province of Connaught,
famous for its handsome contrivement and fortification, its ancient great traffick

and dealings with foreigners, and the worthy parts and qualities of its citizens.”
From a very early period Galway was remarkable as being one of the strongest
fortresses in Ireland, and though Ware affirms that, like most of the other towns,
it was inhabited by the Ostmen, later research has proved that it was one of the
few strong seaports which never fell into their hands. It was not so, however,
with the Anglo-Normans : they not only occupied this town, but made it the
centre of their military operations in the province of Connaught, and obliterated
everything that could recall its being an Irish town. They even passed a bye-law
in 1518 prohibiting the inhabitants from admitting into their houses anyone of the
surrounding Irish septs, “ that neither O nor Mac should strut or swagger through

