--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-235.png ---
County of Galway. 209

near Galway, surrendered to the Catholics, and was, by the order of the Supreme
Council, razed to the ground.

A.D. 1649. “In this year a grant was passed by the Corporation to the Nuns of
St. Clare, of //lane-Altanagh, that they might build a convent there; also,
Thomas Lynch Fitzmark left £250 to the Dominicans, to support two of his own
Kindred of the same Order at their studies in Paris.

A.D. 1650. ‘* The plague continued from the beginning of August, 1649, till
the last of April, 1650. There died about three thousand seven hundred and odd
Persons, whereof there were of the freemen and their families about two hundred
and ten.

A.D. 1651-1652. ‘* In the month of May, 1651, Sir Charles Coot, Commander-
in-Chief of the Parliamentary troops, invaded this province : after taking Athlone,
Sligo, Loughrea, and all the strongest holds of the province, he besieged this
town on the east part thereof, and having taken Tyrilan, Oranmore, and Clare, he
pitched his camp between the great and little lanes, the 12th of August, 1651,
and there continued till the 12th of April, 1652; when this town, despairing of
any relief by sea or land, and most exhausted in paying £400 per week to the
soldiers, surrendered itself upon very good and honorable conditions. One of
these conditions was that the Mayoralty of Galway should continue in the old
Catholic families; but this condition was soon violated.

“Upon the surrender of Galway there was such a dearth in the county, that
many thousands died by the second plague. and three scourges of God were
then reigning, viz.: dearth, plague, and sword; and many to whom life was spared,
had _no great means left to maintain themselves. Upon an information of Colonel
Stubbers, Governor of Galway, of the multitude of vagabonds and idlers in the
country, he obtained an order to ship them for Barbadoes ; and this order was so
carried out, that many housekeepers, going to see their cattle, and their children
were pressed on board, and all others that were registered in the contribution-
book. so that there were 2,000 persons sent off, and were sold there as slaves.

“The unruly crew of soldiers broke down the monuments and coffins of the
dead, and taking from them the winding sheets, as though some treasure had been
within the said coffins, nay, breaking down crucifixes and such spiritual costly
works engraven on fine marble. Sir Peter Tench's tomb, gilt with gold and all
made of fine marble, being in St. Francis's Abbey, the building of which outcost
4500, was along with the rest demolished and converted by the governor of the
said town into a chimney, and the rest of the said grand stones or marbles of the
said abbey. were sold and sent beyond sea, and the monuments left wide open
for the dogs to drag out and eat the corpses interred there ; and likewise they
erased the King's arms, and converted the church and abbeys to stables ; and they
were for the most part illiterate and covetous to hoard up money by the ruin of
the poor inhabitants, without any regard to conscience or public faith, the sword
then being in lieu of the law—our unhappy iron age. The mayor, sheriffs, and
the English, made freemen of their own, to wit, cobblers, butchers, tinkers, and all
sorts of artificers. About June. the Lord-Deputy, Charles Fleetwood, took his
circuit and came to Galway, where he gave a definitive sentence for the removal
of the old inhabitants of Galway, which order was immediately issued from
Dublin contrary to their conditions and articles.

A.D. 1655. ‘‘ Lieutenant Colonel Humfrey Hurd was elected mayor; John
Commell and John Mathews, sheriffs; the mayor by his former calling was a
joiner, and the sheriffs were weavers. This year the Archbishop of Tuam, the Bishop
of Killala, and many more of the clergy, were sent over the seas. New wars broke
out between England and Spain, and a court of claims was erected in Athlone, to
try the qualification of the Irish.

A.D. 1656. ‘The transplantation was put forward, and land accordingly assigned
to the Irish in Connaught and County Clare by the commissioners sitting at
Loughrea, which was carried on with such partiality, that those who had but
coarse lands, or none at all, were best served, and others that had most money and
best friends in court carried the game, and the poor Irish, being utterly beggared,
attending to no purpose, sold their decrees to the English for half-a-crown an
acre, who had land left them for that yearly value, by which means, and other
like courses and debentures of soldiers, the English invested themselves with all

VoL. Il. P

