--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-274.png ---
246 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

in the barony of Clanmaurice, not far from the confluence of
the rivers Feal, Brick, and Galley ; Rattoo is said to have
been a corporation town, in which were seven churches, and
the residence of a bishop ; a high round tower stands in the
present churchyard."

We are told that there was an hospital or commandery
erected here for knights hospitallers by a brother William,
which was confirmed by Meyler, the son of Meyler, in the
reign of King John. The words of Meyler’s charter are:
Which was built by friar William in my land of Kerry.
Witness, David, Btshop of Jarmuan, or Ardfert, who was
consecrated in 1193, and died in 1207. It was afterwards
converted into a monastery of regular canons of the order of
Aroacia, and dedicated to St. Peter and St. Paul.*

The Abbot John having resigned, King John granted a
licence, dated November 14th, 1281, to proceed to an election.t

On the 7th of October, anno 1336, King Stephen granted a
pardon to the abbot and convent for receiving and protecting
Maurice, the son of Nicholas, and his accomplices, who, in a
treasonable manner, had made an insurrection in this country."

In the year 1600, the rebels fortified this abbey, but, on the
approach of Sir Charles Wilmot, they set firetoand destroyed it.”

This abbot was also a Lord of Parliament.*

14th September, 23rd Queen Elizabeth, a lease was granted
to John Zouche of this abbey, for the term of twenty-one
years, at the yearly rent of 79d. Irish money.’

38 Skelig ; situated on the island of the Great Skelig, about

¥ Smith, pp. 213and 214. * War. Mon. * Prynne, vol. 3, p.297. ° King,
p. 205. Y Pacata Hibernia, p. 101. * King, p. 205. ¥ Aud. Gen.

remarkable manner. There are two small pillars at the two corners of the gable
like those in the Cathedral of Glendalough. O'Donovan adds, “ This is un-
doubtedly an erection of the primitive age of the Irish Church.” In the parish
there is a townland called Baile-na-m Breatnach, i.e. “‘ Ballybronagh, or town of
the Britons,” where there are the foundations of an old church, which was 31 feet
in length and 15 in breadth. Similar foundations and portions of a venerable
ruin are found in the townland of Lismore, same parish.
13 The name Séelig is said by our antiquarians to be of Scandinavian origin. It
roperly means “an island rock,” or scopu/us maris, The chief of these rocky
islands, called Skelig-Michael, dedicated to St. Michael, was a favourite resort of
pilgrims from all parts of Ireland in theearly ages. It still retains the ruins of two or
three small stonework oratories. The Annals of Junisfallen give, under the year
812, the entry—“ The Danes plundered Sceilig-Michael in the west of Munster,
and took the anchorites that were in those places, and kept them captives till they
were starved to death.” This, however, did not deter other holy men from
resorting thither; and from the Wars of the Danes (edited by Dr. Todd, page
223) we learn that in another incursion of the northern marauders, the Scellig-
Michael, which was inhabited by a holy solitary named Edgall, was in plun-
dered by them. It adds, that ‘‘ Edgall of the Skelligs was carried off by them
into captivity ; it was by a miracle that he escaped death at their hands, but he
afterwards died of hunger and thirst amongst them.” The Annals of Ulster
chronicle this same event in the year 823—‘‘ Eitgail of Skellig was carried away
by the Gentiles, and he soon after died from hunger and thirst.”

