--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-255.png ---
County of Kerry. 227

Gillechrist O’Laghtnan, abbot of this house, was drowned
in the Irish Sea about the year 1251.

August 2oth, and 2oth of Queen Elizabeth, this monastery
and its possessions, containing half an acre of land, and two
quarters, containing eighty acres of arable and twenty of
pasture, with the tithes of corn, were granted, together with
the Abbey of Mayo, &c., to the burgesses and commonalty of
the town of Athenry.— See Mayo!

 Annal. Loughkee, ® Aud. General.

COUNTY OF KERRY.

Aghadoe ;4€ Aodh, son of Conor, son of Auliff Mor
O'Donoghue, King of Eoganacht Lochalein, died in the year
1231, and was buried in his old abbey at Aghadoe,® of which
we can learn no other particulars.

© Called anciently Aithedea. » Annal Munst.

1 Aghadoe, é.¢., ‘‘ the field of the two yew trees,” still gives name to a parish
tly situate in the barony of Magonihy, and partly in the barony of Dun-
erron, and comprises within its limits the famous Island of Inisfallen and part of
the Lakes of Killarney. In the early Irish Church it gave name to an Episcopal
See. The mins of the old cathedral still remain situated on the summit of
range of low hills, which gradually slope towards the northern shore of the great
Lower Lake. Fifty years ago the following account of these ruins was given in
Wrights Guide to Killarney :—“ The Church of Aghadoe is a vaulted, ancient
building, originally of but rude workmanship, measuring, probably, between
80 and go feet in length, and about 30 in breadth. The whole length is
separated by a thick wall, in which traces of a doorway are discoverable. The
chancel was lighted from the east by two long lancet loopholes. The doorway is
a very masterly specimen of the excellence of the art of sculpture in those days:
six successive mouldings of different patterns ornament its architrave, and,
though carved in an exceedingly soft species of stone, are all perfect and beauti-
ful specimens of a master hand.” 60 feet from the north-west angle of the
church stood the round tower, of which only the stump now remains. On the
hill-side are the ruins of an old castle, which was defended by a fosse and earthen
ramparts.

In the Annals of Jnisfallen, at the year 1158 is recorded, that ‘‘the great
Church of Aghadoe was finished by Auliff-mor-na-Cuimmsionach, son of Aongus
O'Donoghue, having obtained the supreme government of Eoganacht Loca Lein
for his posterity.” This Auliff was killed in 1166, and, as appears by another
entry, fs body was solemnly interred “in the church which he himself had
built in honor of the Holy Trinity, with masses and hymns.”

A Trinity College MS. (f. i., 18) gives us, in the year 1266, the appointment
of Dionysius as Bishop of Aghadoe. Walcott’s List of Suffragan Bishops gives
us at least two other names, viz.:—Gilbert, Bishop of Aghadoe, who, in A.D.
1306, was suffragan of the Bishop of Worcester, and John Camere, Bishop of
A hadoe, suffragan also of the Bishop of Worcester, in the year 1422.

Diocesan returns for 1622, preserved in Marsh’s Library, give us the

