--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-175.png ---
County of Fermanagh. 151

1449. Bartholomew O’Flannagan was prior ; and same year
the church was built.

1462. Died the prior O’Flannagan.”

This abbey was a large and curious building, and the work-
manship remarkably good ; to the east of it stands a beautiful
round tower, 76 feet high and 41 in circumference ; the walls,
which are 3 feet thick, are built of hewn stone, each stone
about a foot square, within and without, and with scarcely any
cement or mortar ; the roof is in the form of a cone, and of
the same materials, and finished with one large stone, shaped
like a bell ; with four windows (and the form of a man’s face
over each) near the top, and opposite to the cardinal points ;

w Annals Four Masters.

during the night being as bright as the day. He proceeded to Clonard, “like the
other Apostles of Erin,” to learn the Gospel under the guidance of St. Finnian; and
when he returned thence, St. Finnian accompanied him, and remained a year with
him in Devenish. The men of Erin attributed to Molaise’s prayers that they
were freed from the plague called the Buidhe Conall, and on that account offered
many gifts and tributes to him. Among the latter were “ a screpall from
every Bouse having three in family ; a cow from every king of a tricha-ced; a
steed from every provincial king 5 and the horse and battle-dress from the King
of Erin; these to be paid every Lughussadh (é., the rst of August) to Molaise.
Travelling one time in Crich-Cairpre, he, by his prayers, and by giving blessed
water to drink, obtained the happy birth of Bishop Finnchadh of Cill-Earga, who
was the fifth successor of St. Mulaise.

Conall Derg, son of Damhin, was king of the territory in which Devenish is
situated, and at the instigation of the Druids, resolved to expel the saint from his
tranquil retreat. Proceeding towards Devenish, the feet of his horses became
immovable at Omhna-gabhtha, which place thence derived its name. Moved by
this and other miracles, the King made a gift of the island to Molaise. From
another local king he received Drmcleathchoir, our saint having performed
a remarkable miracle there. He visited King Aedh at Magh-Caim and received
from him also a gift of territory.

Having acquired great fame throughout Ireland for sanctity and miracles,
St. Molaise resolved to go to Rome, there to perfect himself more and more in the

aths of holiness, and “ that he might bring over some of its clay and Relics to
Erin.” He proceeded first to Ferns to visit his bosom friend, St. Aidan, and
with him entered into the closest spiritual covenant. [See many particulars
relating to the friendship of these two saints,in /rish Ecclesiastical Record, vol. vii.,
Rae 318, seqq.] Afterwards he proceeded to Tours to visit the relics of St. Martin.
ence journeying on to Rome, he reproved on the way some artificers whom he
saw negligent at their work, whereupon they resolved to murder him ; he was, how-
ever, miraculously freed from their hands. He found the gates of Rome closed
against him, and was at first refused admission to the city. When, at length,
permission was given him to enter, the whole city was in the greatest commotion ;
and he “was forthwith led to the Abbot of Rome.” Pope John III. at this
time sat on the Cathedra of St. Peter, and his Pontificate was marked by the
ravages of the Lombards, who, with the exception of Rome, and one or two other
cities, subjugated the whole of Italy. No wonder, then, that the citizens viewed
his arrival with suspicion: when, however, he was found to bea pilgrim from Erin,
the Pope showed him every kindness, and permitted him to say Mass at the
shrines of the Aposles, ‘in the presence of the Pope and the whole community of
Rome.” When Molaise had come ‘‘to the great altar of Peter in Rome, the
altar was clothed in his presence but no Mass Book was put upon it, nor chalice,
nor bell.” Without these three things Molaise never celebrated the divine
mysteries, and whilst he prayed, they were divinely sent upon the altar. After

