--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-207.png ---
County of Galway. 181

sessions of the ——— religious houses of Fynbour, Annagh-
coyne, Kilseaney, and Corcomroe in this county, excepting
only that part of the same which belonged to the Bishop of
Annaghcoonste.®

Arran Naomh ; That is, Arran of the Saints, a number of

* Chief Rememb.

situated as in his life ; but Leamchoill, where he is suid to have first landed, should
be Ochoill. Besides which port, there is Port-Caradoc, called from St. Caradoc
Garth, to whom Kill-na-manach church is dedicated. Near this port is the pool of
Loughna-Keanainne, whereof mention is made in St. Enda’s Life.

“The middle island of Aran contains eight quarters of land, and has a fortification
like that of Dun-Engug, and named from Couchobhair (#.¢., Connor), brother to
Engus, as the tradition goes. Hallowed places in this island are, our Blessed
Lady’s chapel ; St. Kenanagh’s chapel : a hallowed place called Atharla-Kenerge ;
and the chapel of Seactmicrigh, or seven sons cf aking. Tradition says that St.
Kenanagh was a King of Leinster's son, and Kenerg, a King of Leinster's daugh-
ter. Her well (still called Tobar-na-Cindhirge, i.e, St. Kenerg’s well) is there in
a rock, and never becomes dry.

“The third island of ‘Aran, Laisoirthir, or the Eastern Isle (now commonly called
the South Island), contains four quarters of land, with a castle on a height. This
island was also called of old Ara-Coemham, from St. Colman of the ancient Dal-
Messincorb family, descended of the Kings of Leinster, brother to St. Coemgin,
Abbot of Glendalough, and probably disciple of St. Enda, as his brother was.
He lies buried in this island, on the north side of the church dedicated in his
name, where he is honoured the 3rd of November. There is a marble stone over
his tomb with a square wall built about it, on a plain green field in prospect of the
sea where sick people used to lie by night, and recover health from God, for his
sake. I have seen one grievously tormented by a thorn thrust into his eye, who,
by lying thus in St. Colman’s burying-place, had it-miraculously taken out without
the least feeling of the patient. As this Colman gave the name of Ara-Colmhan
to the island, so he from the island is called Colman-airne, #¢., ‘St. Colman of
Aran.’” This saint was born at the close of the fifth century, and is one of those
most honoured among the saints of Aran. He is venerated as special patron
against storms, and Hardiman, in his notes to Jar- Connaught, gives an instance of a
violent storm being appeased by the invocation of St. Colman.

A most valuable paper, headed ‘‘ A Visit to the Aran-Mor of St. Enda,” was
published in the /rish Ecclesiastical Record for 1870 by the Right Rev. Dr. Conroy,
the present learned Bishop of Ardagh ; and we select the following extracts from
it as giving a faithful picture of the present state of ‘‘ Aran of the Saints :—

“‘The Aran isles are three in number, named respectively, Inishmore (the large
island), Inishmain (the middle island), and Inisheen (the eastern island). The
eastern island is the smallest of the three, and is about two-and-a-half miles long ;
the middle island is three miles long; the largest is about nine miles in length?
and twenty-four in circumference, About the year of our Lord 480, the islands
were inhabited by infidels from Corcomroe, the adjacent part of Clare. About
that date St. Enda received the island by the donation of Engus, King of Munster,
whose wife, Darenia, was St. Enda’s own sister. The pagans were converted to
Christianity, or quitted the island, which, under St. Enda, soon became one of
the great Christian sanctuaries of the west of Europe. The Annals of the
Four Masters tell of a great conflagration at Aran in the year 1020, and of the
devastation wrought there by the Normans or Danes in the year 1081. Ata later
period it was held by the O’Briens, the head of whom, commonly called MacTeige
O'Brien, kept his residence at Aircin, or Arkin, on the great island. The O’Briens
were expelled in their turn by the O’Flahertys, who, again, were dispossessed by
Queen Elizabeth, under whom the castle of Arkin was erected in 1587, on the site
of the residence of the O’Briens. Elizabeth gave the island to John Ransom, from
whose hands it passed into the possession of Sir Robert Lynch, of Galway. In
Cromwell's time this castle was pulled down, and a strong fort erected in its place,

