--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-276.png ---
248 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

were all interred here" There are now no remains of this
ancient abbey, which had formerly a very fair steeple.°
Inquisition 6th October, 26th Queen Elizabeth, finds
that this friary had twelve acres of demesne lands in
Tralee, called Ballyveylan, and certain gardens adjacent
thereto: a house with two acres of arable, near the town of
Dingle, and the twentieth part of the corn of every kind in the
following lands :—Manernoa, in this county, containing four
carrucates ; Countesse-Castell, containing twenty acres; the
manor of Tralee, twelve carrucates ; Tawlaghtye, four carru-
cates; Barrowe and Knockenaghe, two carrucates ; Killivally-
lahiffe, eighty acres ; Killynecleragh, forty acres ; the park of
Dingle, five acres; Ballyee, eighty acres; Monenerye, four
carrucates ; and the manor of Island, eighty carrucates.P
Commandery ; The Knights of St. John of Jerusalem had a
commandery or hospital in this country ; for we find, that in
the year 1333, Roger Utlaugh, Prior of Kilmainham, made a
grant of it to Gilbert Ostestenan and Thomas Olethe, for the
term of their own lives, at the annual rent of two marcs ster-
ling, payable at the commandery of Any. Given at Kilkeel.4

COUNTY OF KILDARE.

Athy ;) Situated on the river Barrow, in the barony of Noragh
and Rheban. A borough town sending members to parlia-
ment.

® Lodge, vol. ii. p.16. ° Smith, p. 161. © Chief Remembrancer. % King, p. 32.

1 The following is the explanation of the word “ Athy” as given by O'Donovan
from the Book of Lecan, folio 105 A, in his edition of the Four Masters, year
634 :—“ It was at Athtruisden, near the hill of Mullaghmast, the first engagement
took place, and the men of Munster were routed thence to the river Bearbha
(Barrow), where, at Ath-I (Athy), a second battle was fought, in which Eo (or E)
son of Dergabhail, the fosterer of Eochard Fothart, was slain, and from him the
ford was called Ath-I, s.¢., the ford of Eo.”

Keating, p. 269, gives but one battle at the ford of Athrodain, #.¢., “the ford of
conflict,” now known by the name of Athy. In Lewis's Topag. Dict., vol. i. p-
go, the derivation is from “Athelehac,” #.¢., ‘the ford towards the west.”
M ‘Geoghegan, Joyce, and the Ordnance Survey Letter, adopt the common ex-
planation. The last writer adds, that Moore, in one of his poems, has given celebrity
to the battle at this ford :-—

“* While the moss of the valley grew red with their blood.”
In allusion to this bloody conflict, we have, in Dow/ing’s Annals, p. 28, the “red
ford,” and ‘‘ red meadow,” of Athy.

No dun or fort existed here (Athy) in the Irish times, but it was a walled town of
considerable importance after the arrival of the Anglo-Normans. There are no ruins
at Athy, except the south-east gate, which is still in existence, and those of the
two old parish churches, St. Michael and St. John’s.—Ordnance Survey. There
is a view and description of Athy in the Anthologia Hibernica, vol. i., p. 325+

