--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-237.png ---
County of Galway. 211

1381. In this year Pope Urban empowered the guardian of
this friary to excommunicate every person within the province
of Connaught who should adhere to the anti-pope, Clement
VIL

1460. On the 26th of January died William, son of Meyler
the Great, who bequeathed to this convent half a marc yearly,
to be paid on the feast of St. Brigid.4

° Allemande. 4 Lib. Obit., King, p. 312.

object. Indeed, the register which records the multitudinous bequests and legacies
of the townspeople to that monastery, is still in the possession of one of our breth-
ren in Galway ; and on turing over its pages, I found ample evidence of the love
and veneration which the citizens of every grade always cherished for our institute.
Thus, for example, as I learnt from the register, Edward Phillibyn, a wealthy
merchant, rebuilt the dormitory for our friars in 1493; and in 1538, John French,
then chief magistrate of the city, erected the beautiful chapel on the south side of
the monastery, in honour of God and St. Francis, and for the good estate of his
own soul and the souls of his posterity. As for the tombs of the distinguished
denizens of Galway and its neighbourhood who selected our church for their last
resting-place, let it suffice to say, that they are yey numerous and splendid pro-
ductions of the sculptor’s chisel. De Burghs, Lynches, Fitz-Stephens, and
O’Flaherties, moulder there beneath marble monuments, exquisitely wrought,
rich in heraldry and pompous epitaphs, recording many a high achievement on the
battle-field, in the senate, and in the mart. Apart from those gorgeous monu-
ments—last efforts of human vanity, if you will—there is, in the south side of the
choir, an humble cenotaph, sacred to the memory of a truly great man, whose
extensive and profound erudition reflects honour on the Franciscan order, of which
he was, in sooth, a most distinguished ornament ; I speak of Maurice O'Fihiley, or
Maurice de Portu, whom Julius II. advanced to the archiepiscopal see of Tuam,
in 1506. Having completed his studies in Padua, he for a long time taught phil-
osophy in that learned city, and earned a world-wide reputation by the variety of
his writings. some of which were not published till after his death. His principal
works are ‘Commentaries on Scotus,’ a ‘ Dictionary of the Scriptures,’ the ‘ En-
chiridion Fidei, or a Manual of the Faith,’ which he dedicated to the Earl of
Kildare ; ‘The Compendium of Truths,’ in Leonine metre, and many others
which it would be superfluous to enumerate. This truly learned man was corrector
of the press for that far-famed printer, Benedict Locatelli, and filled the same
place in the printing establishment of Octavian Schott, at Venice. Having assisted
at the early sessions of the Council of Lateran, 1512, and returned to Ireland in
the following year, he landed at Galway, where he fell sick, and died in our con-
vent there. Few, indeed, have won greater renown in the republic of letters, and
well did he deserve the epithet bestowed upon him by the learned men ot his day,
who justly styled him ‘Flos Mundi.’ Two of his successors in the see of Tuam,
Thomas O’Mullaly and Christopher Bodkin, await the resurrection in the same
humble tomb.

“ This venerable monastery, however, was doomed to share the fate of most of
our other houses in Connaught ; and, accordingly, in the year 1570, the greater
part of its possessions was wrested from the friars, and granted to the Corporation
of Galway and their successors. As for the convent and church, they were both
assigned to an individual, who, pretending to have adopted the doctrines of the An-
glican religion, in order to accommodate himself to the times, contrived withal to do
great service to our brotherhood when they were banished from their ancient pre-
cincts. Nothing, indeed, could have been more strange than the conduct of this
anonymous grantee ; for he essed himself of the old conventual register, in
which all legacies bequeathed to our friars were entered; and not only did he
vigorously enforce payment of the amounts, but he actually handed them over to
the community, then residing in a house which they rented in the city, in order
that all such pious donations might be expended on the repairs and preservation of
the ancient edifice. Furthermore, as the island on which the monastery stands

