--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-268.png ---
240 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

Irvelagh ;’ In the barony of Magunihy, and on the borders
of Loughlean ; Donald, son of Thady M‘Carthy, in the year
1440, founded a friary here, under the invocation of the Holy
Trinity, for Conventual Franciscans ; he repaired it in the
year 1468, a few months before his decease.t

Irrelagh has continued since that time the cemetery of the
M‘Carthy family. And Donald, Earl of Clancare, was interred
here ; as was Patrick, Lord Kerry, the Earl’s nephew, who
died August 12th, anno 1600."

This abbey was re-edified by the Roman Catholics in the
year 1602, but was soon after permitted to go to ruin. It is
surrounded by a venerable grove of very tall ash trees, which,
in some places, grow spontaneously from the ruins. The
choir, nave, and steeple, are yet entire, as are the cloisters,
which consist of several Gothic arches, all of solid marble, en-
closing a small square, in the centre of which stands a very
tall yew-tree, whose spreading branches, overshadowing and
throwing a brown shade over the niches of the whole cloister,
form a much more solemn and awful kind of covering than
the original one. The steeple of this extensive building is
supported by a Gothic arch, which, from its size, could only
contain one bell.” A miraculous image of the Virgin Mary
was said to have been preserved here.

This abbey, with its possessions, containing four acres of

* War. Mon, * Lodge, vol. 2, p. 109. Y Smith's K., p. 143.

7 According to the Franciscan records, it was M‘Carthy More, Prince of
Desmond, who, in A.D. 1430, laid the foundations of the Franciscan convent at
Irrelagh, now better known as Mucross. He was ever afterwards, for this reason,
styled Desmond “ of the monastery :” his son Donnell completed the building in
1440. In the centre of the choir, MacCaithy More erected a tomb for himself
and his posterity. Here, too,in 1582. was interred Catherine, daughter of Teige
M‘Carthy, and wife of Fitzmaurice of Kerry. The O'Sullivan More and the
O’Donoghoes had also their sepulchres within its hallowed precincts. The friars
were driven from the place in 1589, when some of them were slain by the soldiers
of Sir William Fitzwilliam, then Lord Deputy. The guardian. Father Holan, and
some religious resumed possession of the convent in 1602, and found a great part
of the church in good preservation. They by degrees perfectly restored the
ancient buildings, but were again obliged to abandon them in 1629. A few years
peace again smiled on them during the rule of the Confederation of 1641: these
were followed by utter ruin under the Puritans. The O’Gorman MS. in R.A.
tells us that Father Caveagh, a native of Kerry, a pious and learned man was
Provincial of the Franciscan Order in Ireland, and during the Cromwellian
usurpation suffered martyrdom for the faith at the island of Scariff, in the west of
the County of Kerry.

In the same barony with Mucross, is the townland of Kilgobnat, in which there is
the ruin of a small rude church dedicated to St.Gobnat. Some of the names of the
parishes also recall the memories of early saints, as A‘leentierna, i.e., “the little
cell of St. Tighernach ;” Xilcummin, ‘* St. Cummin’s Church ;” Ai/binaun,
“the Church of St. Benignus ;” and Mo/ahif, in Irish Magh-/aithimsh, is probably
“ De aan Muighe-laithimh” which is mentioned in some of our early
records,

