--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-224.png ---
198 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

The ruins which remain of this friary, prove it to have been
a sumptuous building ; part of it was taken down to erect in its
room the present barracks, and the cloisters probably stood
where the barrack-yard is now ; the whole was well built of a
blue coloured stone ; the tower, for half its height, is larger
below than above. The great east window is bold and
of good workmanship ; there were here numbers of mauso-
leums, but the soldiers have erased them all, and with their
fragments the church is nearly covered.

Franciscan Friary ; Was founded here in the year 1464,
under the invocation of St. Michael, by Thomas, Earl of
Kildare ; his wife, Margaret Gibbon, erected the first chapel ;
the second was built by an Earl of Desmond, and the third
by O’Tully.

Ballynehinch ; This village gives name to the barony.

A monastery for Carmelites, or White friars, was founded
here by O'Flaherty,’ in the year 1356 ;' which is the only
account we can find of this friary.

Beach ,’ A monastery of the third order of Franciscans was
founded here some time after the year 1441."

In an Inquisition of the 28th year of the reign of Queen
Elizabeth (1585), it is called the ruined cell or chapel of
Beagh, in the barony of Clare; its possessions were half a
quarter of land, pasture, arable, &c., with its appurtenances
and tithes, which were long concealed, and were of the yearly
value of 6s. 8d., Irish money.”

Boilean Clair ,® In the diocese of Tuam ; a monastery was
founded here for Franciscan friars in the year 1291. Wadding
informs us, that this house was very rich, and that it had
considerable possessions.*

Burgakere, or Burgoflore ; Here was a monastery in the pos-
session of the Carmelites, or White friars, and which the regular
canons of St. Augustin laid claim to as belonging only to them

Clare Galway ;° Situated in the barony of Clare, five miles

 Allemande. * War. Mon. * Allemande. *% War. Mon. * King, p. 109.
* Allemande. ¥ Id.

7 Beagh, in Irish Beitheach, i.e., land abounding in birch, is situate in the barony
of Clare. In the same barony there is a Donaghpatrick dedicated to our Apostle
St. Patrick, and also Killower, #.2., Kill-Leabhair, or ‘‘ Church of the Book.” In
the parish of Killower lived the MacBeolans, keepers of the black bell of
St. Patrick, and from them it passed to the family of Geraghty. It was for
centuries exhibited to pilgrims on Domhnach-Cruim-Duibh, or Garland Sunday,
on the mountain of Croaghpatrick, where it was held in the highest veneration. It
was traditionally supposed that this bell was originally pure silver, but became
black by its contact with the demons when our national Apostle finally vanquished
them after his long penitential exercises on the summit of Croaghpatrick.

® This is another name for C/are-Ga/way, of which we will just now treat.

® Clare-Galway is called in Irish Basle-an-Chlair. On the banks of the gentle
stream that flows through this town, John de Cogan, in 1290, erected a Franciscan

