--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-186.png ---
160 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

St. Fergus, the son of Endeus, was also abbot here ; his
festival is held 29th of March.4

4 Jd. p. 713.

ease, called Puble, with half a quarter of herenagh land called Puble- Patricke,
and Drumkenada thereunto adjoining, out of which the said Bishop of Clogher
had two shillings per annum, and that the herenagh of the said land was Munter-
owen, who had to maintain the said chapel, and the said vicar to maintain a
curate. It was also found that the Bishop of Clogher was seized in fee, in right of
his bishopric of, and in several rents and duties issuing out of, certain parcels of
herenagh land, within the half baronies of Cuyle and Tircannada, viz.. out of the
herenagh land of Eniskine, containing three quarters aud an half tate (whereof
Munterowen was the herenagh, and half a quarter and half a tate free to himself)
two marks per annum, and also cosherie and refections.

The following entries are taken from the Four asters :—

A.D. 1389 ‘The Vicar of Inis-Cain, died. O'Donovan adds, in a note that
according to the Dublin copy of the Annuals of Ulster, this vicar's name was
Nemeas O’h-Eoghain, a name still common in this parish, but anzlicized Owen

1393. Matthew O’Howen. Chaplain of Inis Caon, died. O'Donovan in his note
writes, that the island of Inis Caoin, now Inishkeen, having an area of 260 acres,
English measure, contains the ruins of the old church in a burial ground,

1394. Gilla-Downey O’Howen, Official of Lough Eme, and Parson and
Erenagh of Inis-Caoin, died.

1467. Miall, son of Mahon Magrath, Official of Lough Erne, and Parson of
Inis-Caoin, died.

1490. Fergus, the son of John, son of Mathew [O’Howen], Anchorite of Inis-
Cavan. died.

1498. MacManus of Seanadh, #.¢., Cathal Oge, the son of Cathal, son of Gilla-
Patrick, son of Matthew, &c., a man who had kept a house of general hospitality,
a biatach at Seanadh-Mic-Manus, a canon chorister in Armagh, and in the
bishopric of Clogher. Parson of Inis-Caoin, Deacon of Lough Ere, and Coadjutor
of the Bishop of Clogher for fifteen years before his death, the repertory of
the wisdom and science of his own country, fruitful branch of the canon, and a
fountain of charity and mercy to the poor and the indigent of the Lord : he it was
who had collected together many historical books, from which he had compiled
the historical book of Baile.Mic-Manus, for his own use—died of galar breac
[the small-pox], on the tenth of the Calends of April, which fell on a Friday, and
in the sixtieth year of his age.

The following is Doctor O'Donovan’s note on this entry :—‘‘Scanadh. This was
the ancient name of an island situated in the Upper Lough Eme, between the
baronies of Magherastephana and Clanawley, in the County of Fermanagh. It
is called Ballymacmanus Island, in various deeds and leases, and by the natives of
Clanawley, who speak the Irish language ; but it has lately received the fancy
name of Belle-Isle, from its beauty. The Cathal Oge MacManus here men-
tioned, was the compiler of the Asmna/s of Ulster, which are often called Annales
Senatenses, from this island in Lough Erne, where they were compiled, the
situation of which has not been hitherto pointed out. The Amnals of Ulster, of
which the late Dr. Charles O’Conor has published an edition, begin with the
year 444, and were carried down to 1498, the year of his death, by the original
compiler. and they were continued to the year 1537, by Rory O'Cassidy, and to the
end of the 17th century, by the O’Luinins of Arda, and others.”—See also Harris's
Edition of Ware's W’riters of Ireland, p. 90.

The Calendar of Donegal has, at 10th January, “ St. Diomman of Inis-Caoin,’
not given by Archdall. Wakeman in his Lough Erne, p. 58, mentions Iniskeen
as ‘the beautiful island,” and as once the site of the parish church of the district
including Enniskillen, adding that some fragments of the old edifice remain, but
in a state of utter ruin, and that portions of stone crosses of early Irish type indicate
the very ancient importance of the place, the cemetery being still, next to that
of Devenish, the most sought for place of sepulture among the old families of
the district.

In 1704. the Rev. William O'Hoyne, aged 56, was parish priest of Eniskeen,
having received orders in November, 1670, from Primate Oliver Plunket.

