--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-264.png ---
236 . Ancient Monasteries of Ireland,

many cities of Belgium. He is styled ‘‘ filius Hiberniae regis,” and is supposed to
have received his heavenly crown about the year 660.

Smith, in his History of Kerry, says that St. Malchader's church was probably
built by the Spaniards, O’Donovan, in the Ordnance Survey papers, laughs at
this silly statement, and adds that the details of its ornamentation all belong to the
old Irish style, ‘‘ and this beautiful church is decidedly one of the most interesting
of the class of churches built by the Irish previous to the Anglo-Norman
invasion.” He also gives us the following interesting particulars: —‘ On one of
the lintels of the church there is a rude representation of a human head and face,
believed by the natives to represent St. Brendan, or St. Melchedar. There is a
small square pillar at the N.W. and S.W. corner of the west gable, like those at
the Cathedral of Glendalough. There was a stone cross on the summit of the
west gable, which was hurled from its place by a hurricane: itis now disfigured,
and lying prostrate in the graveyard. Opposite the door of the church is a stone
cross, the lower part of which is buried in the ground. but still the remaining part
over ground measures 9 feet 2 inches in height, and 4 feet 5 inches across the
arms ; there are several small crosses in the graveyard. To the north of the
church, about 200 paces, and at the other side of the stream called Abja-ma Cille,
i.e., Church River, there is a very curious ruin of a dwelling-house, called St.
Brendan's House, and in Irish fotpach Dnesnainn. It is one of the very few
dwelling-houses of the ancient Irish which the hand of envious time has spared to
us, The only remains of houses of the same character which I have ever seen, are
at Kilmacduagh and Lorrach. To the N.W. of this ruin, about one-fourth of an
English mile, on the same townland, is a curious C/oghan, or stone cell, more
curious than any of those now remaining in the islands to the west of Connaught.
[This is the oratory of St. Melchedar]. Eleven feet in height of the walls still
remain, but the ro.f is destroved. Tradition ascribes the erection of this cell,
which they call a chapel, to the great St. Brendan and his cotemporary, St.
Melchedar. Still farther, to the S.W., in the townland of Caher-aorgaun, is a
very curious Cafer, or stone fort. It has within it three round Cloghauns, or houses
of stone of considerable size, and two very small ones. The external wall of this
caher forms a circle 88 feet in diameter, and the wall itself is 9 feet in thickness,
and built of loose stones without any kind of cement. The most conspicuous of
the bee-hive houses within it lies towards the west side: it measures on the inside
15 feet in diameter at the floor, which is prefectly circular, and the diameter
gradually decreased towards the top till it was closed at the top with one stone,
‘The roof is at present destroyed, but g feet of the height of the circle is up and
in very good preservation.”

Some of the other parishes in this barony also retain interesting memorials of
our early saints. Thus, in the pansh of Clohaun North, in Irish Clochan, there
are the ruins of an old church situate on the west of the margin of Brandon
Bay. It consisted of nave and choir, 24 feet long, 20 in breadth. Inthe south

is inserted a rude representation of a head and face, supposed to represent
the head of Crom-Dubh, of whom there are traditions connecting him with some
of the highest mountains in Ireland, ¢g., Slieve-Donard, in the County l’own,
Croaghpatrick, in County Mayo, and Brandon-hill, in Kerry. At the distance of a
hundred paces from the church is a holy well dedicated to St. Brendan, at which
8 pattern is annually he'd on “ Domnach Cruim Duibh,” which is the last Sunday
in Summer. In Clohaun-South is Tober-Martin, #.¢., St. Martin’s well, and a
burial-place called Keel, in Irish Cid/, i.e. ‘‘the Church :” probably it, too, was
dedicated to St. Martin.

In the parish of Minnard are the ruins of a very ancient church called Ci/-
Muire, iz., the Church of the Blessed Virgin Mary: from it the townland is
called Kilmurry. The ruins of the old church are about 400 yards ‘rom the sea.
About 100 yards nearer to the sea is the well of St. John the Baptist, at which
the patron was held on the 29th of August.

In the parish of Aunagh, in Irish Eanach, #.¢., ‘‘a marsh,” there are the ruins of
achurch, and near it the remains of a caher, or ancient stone fort. At a short
distance, at the north side of G/eann-Scoithin, is a long flag called by the natives
** Scota’s grave.” This district is mentioned by all our authorities on the subject
as the landing-place of the first Milesian colony in Ireland.

