--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-243.png ---
County of Galway. ; 217

Kilcorban ; a small village, consisting of a cabin or two,
with the ruins of a chapel, now under the invocation of the
Virgin Mary, but originally dedicated to St. Corban, who died
in the year 732.°

A.D. 1446. Thomas Burgh, Bishop of Clonfert, by and with
the consent of his chapter, granted this chapel, with some land
adjoining thereto, to the friars of the third order of St.
Dominick, at the earnest entreaty of John Fitz-Rery, Vicar-
General of that order, and his brethren. This donation was
confirmed by the Bull of Pope Eugene IV., dated March 15th,
1446, and directed to the abbot of Via Nova, or Abbey Gor-
mogan, in the diocese of Clonfert ; the bishop died that same
year.

The statue of the Virgin Mary, which was worshipped in
the chapel of Kilcorban, called the chapel of the Blessed
Virgin of the Rosary, is still preserved by the family of the
Burghs of Pallais; and Burke, in his history of the Domini-
cans, gives us the following citation from John Heyn respect-
ing this statue :—“ The frequent miracles,” says Heyn, “ which
God performs through that statue, daily confirm the Catholics
in the true faith, and in the worship of the Queen of Heaven.”*

Kilcolgan ; St. Colgan was abbot here about the year 580 ;
and is patron saint of the abbey.! Kilcolgan is now a parish
church, in the barony of Doonkillen, and diocese of Kill-
macduagh.

We find another monastery of the same name in the diocese
of Clonfert, which was founded by St. Columbkill, who ap-
pointed St. Colgan, one of his disciples, abbot of it.¢

Kilconnell ;© Gives name to a barony, and is seven miles
west of Ballinasloe.

* Act. SS. p. 449. * War. Mon. Burke, p. 342. ° As quoted by Burke,
P. 344 “id SS. p. 381. 8 Tr. Th. p. 495-

.® Father Mooney, the Franciscan chronicler, visited this convent in the begin-
ning of the 17th century, and has left the following account of it: “It was founded
for conventual Franciscans in 1353, by William O'Kelly, presumptive heir to the
lordship of Hy-Many. It was, indeed. an edifice second to none of its class in
Ireland, admirably constructed, spacious in all its departments, and most eligibly
situated on the great thoroughfare leading from Athlone to Galway. In 1460,
however, the original building was considerably modified and enlarged, when, at
the instance of Malachy O'Kelly, the convent was reformed, and its inmates
adopted the strict observance. Malachy O’Kelly died in 1464, and was buried in
the sumptuous sepulchre which was erected within the walls of the church by
William, the original founder, for himself and his posterity. Indeed, I have seen
in that church numerous monuments erected by the chief families of the bordering
districts, which, as regards the marble of which they were wrought, and the ex-
quisite Gnish of their elaborate sculpture, might challenge comparison with some
of the most artistic developments of the same character in the cathedral of St.
Gudule at Brussels, I found the church in good preservation, owing in great
measure to a singular circumstance, which I will mention by-and-by. It may not
be out of place, however, to premise that the church and monastery were built of

