--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-208.png ---
182 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

churches having been erected in this island, in which the
bodies of many saints repose. :

Engus, King of Cashel, at the request of St. Albeus,
granted this island to St. Enna, or Endeus, who built ten

of which fort we shall have occasion to speak further on. In December, 1650,
joo of the Irish landed here in boats, flying from defeat on the mainland, and were
speedily followed by 1,300 of the English foot, with a battery. The Irish sur-
rendered, and Sir R. Lynch having been declared a traitor, Erasmus Smith became
owner of Aran. This crafty undertaker disposed of his interest to the Butlers, one
of whom, in 1662, was created Earl of Aran; from the Butlers the islands passed
through the Fitzpatricks to the Digbys, who are the present owners.

“ The present inhabitants, about 3,400 in number, mainly belong to the race
that inhabits the south-western parts of Ireland. We bear cheerful witness to the
accuracy of the following account of their social state, given by Dr. Petrie :-—‘I
had heard so much of the virtues of the Aran islanders, of their primitive simpli-
city, their ingenuous manners, and their singular hospitality, that I could not help
doubting the truth of a picture so pleasing and romantic, and felt anxious to ascer-
tain, by personal observation, how far it might be real. . . . Collectively, the
inhabitants of the Aran islands may be said to exhibit the virtues of the Irish
character with, perhaps, as little intermixture of its vices as the lot of humanity
will permit. They are a brave and hardy race, industrious and enterprising, as
is sufficiently evinced, not only by the daily increasing number of their fishing
vessels. the barren rocks which they are covering with soil and making productive,
but still more by the frequency of their emigration from their beloved country and
friends to a distant wilderness, led solely by the hope that their indefatigable
Jabour may be employed there to the greater ultimate benefit of their families.
They are simple and innocent, but also thoughtful and intelligent. Lying and
drinking—the vices which Arthur Young considers as appertaining to the Irish
character—form, at least, no part of it in Aran, for happily their common poverty
holds out less temptation to the one or opportunity for the other. I do not mean
to say that they are rigialy temperate, or that instances of excess, followed by the

Irish consequences of broken heads, do not occasionally occur ; such could
not be expected when their convivial temperament and dangerous and laborious
occupations are remembered. They never swear, and they have a high sense of
decency and propriety, honour and justice, In appearance they are healthy,
comely, and prepossessing ; in their dress (with few exceptions), clean and com-
fortable ; in manner, serious, yet cheerful, and easily excited to gaiety ; frank and
familiar in conversation, and to strangers polite and respectful; but, at the same
time, wholly free from servile adulation. They are communicative, but not too
loquacious ; inquisitive after information, but delicate in seeking it, and grateful
for its communication.’ ”

After some interesting remarks on the various styles of architecture in the early
Trish Church, the learned writer thus continues :—

‘* We found a beautiful specimen of the class of larger churches here described,
in Tempul-Mac-Duagh, at Kilmurvey. It has the nave and chancel which charac-
terise the first-mentioned species of the Tempulls. The nave is little more than
18 feet long by 14 broad, and the chancel nearly 16 feet long by 11 broad.
The stones of the walls are of immense size, and the entire building has a
sombre, severe look. The doorway is a remarkable instance of the cyclopean
door, and resembles the doorway of the Cathedral Church of Kilmacduagh, erected
for St. Colman Macduagh by his kinsman Guaire Aidhne, King of Connaught,
about the year 610. It is 5 feet 6 inches in height, 2 feet in width at the
top, and 2 feet 3 inches at the bottom. The lintel is of granite, and measures
5 feet 6 inches in length, 1 foot 6 inches in height, and extends the entire
oe of the wall, which is 2 feet 6 inches.—(See Petrie’s Round Towers,
P. 174.

‘*Our chief interest, however, was naturally centred in the group of buildings
which exist at Killeany, and consist of the church of St. Benignus, the church of
St. Enda, the round tower of St. Enda, and the stone houses in its immediate

