--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-250.png ---
224 Anctent Monasteries of Ireland.

and on the 23rd of November following, he granted indulgen-
ces to all who had contributed to the building. The walls
are still nearly entire, and plainly show that the monastery of
Portumna was by no means an ignoble structure ; the ancient
choir is now the parish church.°

Rathmhath ;*® An island in Lough-Corrib,! where, it is said,
St. Fursey, the son of Fintan, of the blood royal of South
Munster, built an abbey ; he died about the year 653, and his
festival is celebrated in France on the 16th of February.®

There are no traces of this house, but Colgan supposes it
to be a parish church near Lough Corrib, which is now called
Kilfursa! ;

Ross; A monastery for conventual Franciscans was founded
at Rosstraily, in the diocese of Tuam, A.D. 1431, which was
reformed by the Observantines, in the year 1470. It is avery
solitary place, being on all sides surrounded by water.

Rosstraily must either be the present town of Ross, which
gives name to the half-barony, or another town of the same
name, situated between Lough Corrib and a lesser lough in
the barony of Moycullen.¢

Rosserelly ;*" Situated on the river of Ross, near Lough
Corrib, in the barony of Clare.

The Lord Granard founded a monastery here for Francis-
cans of the strict observance, in the year 1498.5

A chapter of the Franciscan Order was held here in 1509.!

At the suppression of religious houses, this friary was
granted to the Earl of Clanricarde.—See Aghrim.

The Roman Catholics repaired the Monastery of Rosser-
elly in the year 1604." And the ruins, which yet remain, show
it to have been a very extensive building!

Sleushancogh ; there was a friary of conventual Franciscans

© Burke, pp. 303 and 307. * Called anciently Lough-Orbsen. ° Act. SS. fp. 89
and 90. War. Writers, pp. 34 and 304. * Act. SS. p. 89 and go. * Wadding in
Allemande. ™ War. Ms. vol. 34 and War. Mon. ' King, p. 319.  * Coa,
vol. ii, p. 10. } Pococke’s Fournal.

3% See above note 1 at Inisquin.

% Rosserilly, in Irish Ros-na-Threallagh, situate about eight miles from Tuam, is
stated, by the Franciscan chronicler, to have been founded for their order in 1351.
It is surrounded by marshes and bogs, and can be approached only by a causeway
paved with large stones, which is fully two hundred paces in length. In the 26th
year of Elizabeth the religious were expelled, and the vestments, altar-plate,
books, and records, were all destroyed: nothing remained but the bare walls
and the rifled tombs. It subsequently, by grant of the Queen, passed into the
hands of the Earl of Clanrickard, who permitted the Franciscans to repair the
church and monastery, and they continued to reside there till Daniel, Protestant
Archbishop of Tuam, at the instance of Sir Arthur Chichester, then Lord- Deputy,
drove them out once more, and caused the altars to be demolished. See a paper
on “ oe Abbey of Ross-Errily,” in Jrish Ecclesiastical Record, vol. Sth,
page 39.

