--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-198.png ---
172 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

Cornelius de Muntir-moroghow, with the consent of Cathol,
King of Connaught, granted to this abbey the village of Lis-
macuan, in Clonfergaile. Witnesses, Cathol, the King ;
Catholicus, Archbishop of Tuam, who died A. D.1201; H.,
Bishop of Anaghdun ; and L., Bishop of Elphin, &c., &c.»

King Cathol, the founder, was expelled his kingdom in the
year 1200. During his exile, William Burke totally spoiled
the abbey ;' but Cathol was again restored in 1202."

» Ogyg. p. 30. ' M'Geogh.  * Pembridge.

destroyed more of the traitors and enemies of Ireland than any other had done,
the chief supporter of the clergy, and benefactor of the poor and indigent—a man
in whom God had planted more goodness and greater virtues than in any other
of the Irish nobility of his time. ‘rom the period of his wife's death till his own,
he led a single and virtuous life. During his reign, tithes were first lawfully col-
lected in Ireland. This upright and noble prince, this warrior of pure piety and
just judgments, died on the 28th day of Summer, on a Monday, in the habit of a
grey friar, in the Monastery of Knockmoy, which he himself had dedicated to God,
and granted to the monks, with its site and lands, and in which he was interred
with due honours and solemnity. The place of Cathal-Crovdearg’s birth was at
the Port of Lough Mask, and he was nurtured and educated in Hy Diarmada,
with Teige O’Conceanain.”

1228. This year the Abbey of Knockmoy was plundered of its treasures.

1240. According to Martene, tom. iv., col. 1347, the Abbot of Knockmoy,
because he allowed his head to be washed by a woman, narrowly escaped being
deprived of his office, and @ penance was imposed upon him for six days, on two
of which he was only allowed bread and water diet. He was also interdicted the
abbots’ stall ‘for forty days, and a caution was given that no person in Holy
Orders should again be guilty of a like tran: sion,

1249. Marian O’Laghnan, Archbishop of Tuam, died. He appropriated the
Church of Kilfelge to the Abbey of Knockmoy. Sir James Ware says of him,
after speaking of Felix O'Ruaden, Archbishop of Tuam, who died in 1238 :—“It
was Marian, or Mcelmurry, O’Laghlan, Dean of Tuam, that succeeded him, a
very great canonist. Presently upon his election, he posted to Rome to receive
Confirmation from the Pope, where, being appproved of by Pope Gregor IX,,
he also obtained the pall. This man undertook a pilgrimage (whether before or
after he was Bishop I know not) to Jerusalem. He died at Athlone a little
before Christmas, in 1249. He appropriated the Church of Kilfelge to the Abbey
of Knockmoy, a/ias Conquest Hill.”

1262. Thomas O'Conor, Archbishop of Tuam, having received the consent of
the chiefs of Hydermader, united the Rectory of Hydermader to Knockmoy.

1266. Turlough, son of Hugh, son of Cathal Croibdearg, died here, having
previously taken the habit of the order, where he was interred.

Sava, daughter of Cathal Croibdearg, was here interred.

1267. Bryan, son of Turlough, son of Roderick O'Connor, died here, and was
interred in the same tomb with the other members of his family.

Donough, son of Roderick, son of Hugh O'Connor, having been slain by the
English, was interred at Knockmoy.

1290. Laurence O’Laghnan. Abbot of Knockmoy, was consecrated Bishop of
Kilmacduach. Sir James Ware says of him:—‘‘ Laurence O’Laghnan, a
cystercean monk, abbot, first of Ashro, afterwards of Buelly, and at last of Knock-
moy, succeeded.”

1295. Donald O'Kelly, son of Connor O’Kelly, chieftain of Hy-Many, by his
wife, the daughter of O’Hynes, died. The Four Masters thus record his death :—
** Donald O’Kelly, lord of Hy-Maine, the most wise of counsel in his time, died
in a monastic habit, and was interred in the Monastery of Knockmoy.”

1401. This year Malachy O'Kelly, who had become chief of Hy-Many in 1375,
six years before his father’s death, died and was interred in the choir of Knockmoy

