--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-242.png ---
216 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

St. Brendan erected an abbey on Inis-mac-hua-cuinn, or the
island of Hua-Cuinn, in Lough Corrib ; and made St. Meldan,
one of his disciples, abbot. St. Meldan died some time before
the year 626 ; his festival is held on the 7th of February.”

Kilbought ; four miles east of Loughrea, in the barony of
Athenry.

We are told that a monastery was founded here by the
family of Waley ;t and the Inquisition of the 6th of Queen
Elizabeth expressly mentions, that the friars of the third order
of St. Francis were possessed of this friary.*

1507. Mathew, Bishop of Clonfert, died here.»

Kilbrenan ; we have no account whatsoever of the founda-
tion, but we find in the records, that this monastery, and its
appurtenances, containing one acre, with six small cottages in
the town of Kilbrenan, thirty acres of arable land, and fifteen
of pasture in the said town, were granted, together with the
Abbey of Mayo, to the burgesses and commonalty of Athenry.
See Mayo. .

Y Act. SS, p.271. * War. Mon, * King, p.99.  » War. Bps. p. 641.

foreigner,” and now called Teampull-na-Naomh, i.c., ‘the church of the saint.”
The latter church lies a short distance to the south-east of the church of St.
Patrick, and an old winding path, which led from one to the other, may still be
traced. Of the ‘‘Templepatrick,” or St. Patrick’s Church, Dr. Petrie gives
various drawings, and adds :—" That this church is of the age of St. Patrick, as is
believed in the traditions of the country, and as its name would indicate, can, I
think, scarcely admit of doubt ; for, though there is another church on the island
of beautiful architecture, and of similar form and nearly equal dimensions, and
undoubtedly of an age considerably anterior to the arrival of the English, it
appears, nevertheless, a modern structure as compared with this.” It has a nave,
triumphal arch, and chancel, and is in its greatest external length 35 feet 6 inches.
The interior of the nave is 17 feet 8 inches in length, and 13 feet 6 inches in
breadth, and the chancel is a square of 9 feet. The island is also remarkable for
its famous monument of St. Lugaedh, which presents one of the most ancient
religious inscriptions preserved in Ireland. The monument consists of an
upright pillar of dark limestone, about 4 feet high, and stands at a little distance
in front of Templepatrick. Petrie, O’Donovan, and Todd, regarded the inscrip-
tion as commemorating St. Lugna, the son of Liemania, and nephew of our
Apostle St. Patrick. However, the later researches of Irish antiquaries, and the

hotographs and accurate drawings of our ancient monuments, published by Miss

tokes (Christian Inscriptions, vol ii., page 9), prove its true reading to be “Lie
Luguaedon Macci Menueh,” i.¢., “The Stone of Lughaedh, son of Menu, or
Moenain.” We may add the remark of Dr. Todd, that ‘‘the characters of this
inscription are such as may with almost certainty be regarded as not later than the
beginning of the sixth century.”—(S¢. Patrick,. page 365.) Dr. O'Conor, in
Rerum Hib. Scriptores, in note to the Four Masters, at A.D. 726, writes of this
island :—“ In qua sunt duae Capellae et multa sanctorum sepulchra.” The only
tomb, however, that can now be distinguished, besides that of St. Lugaedh,
is the monument of Muirgheas O’Nioc, Archbishop of Tuam, who died here in
the year 1128. It is a piece of square masonry, i long by 7 feet 8 inches
broad, and_about 4 feet high. The Annals of Ulster and the Four Masters
give at A.D, 1128, ‘‘Muirgheas O'Nioc, Comharb of Jarlath of Tuam-da-
ghualann for a time, died on Inisaughoill.” From this entry it would appear
latte that he resigned the see, and retired to lead an eremitical life on this
island.

