--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-226.png ---
200 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

_ St. Brendan, the son of Findloga, studied under St. Finian
in the Academy of Clonard, and A.D. 553, or 562, he founded
an abbey here, under the invocation of the Virgin Mary. St.
Brendan was the founder of many other abbeys, and is said to
have presided over 3,000 monks, each of whom did indus-
triously earn a sufficiency for his support; this saint
instituted a particular form or rule for the observance of
his successors, who, in the course of time, followed that of
St. Augustin.

A.D. 570. St. Moinem, or Moenn, died on the Ist of March ;
* Act. SS. p. 192, Annal. Munst. War. Mon.

manifold virtues. He founded the See of Clonfert in the year 558, and established
here at the same time the monastery which in aftertimes received the name “ De
Portu puro,” where three thousand religious served God under his rule. He died
at his sister’s monastery in Enaghdune, or Annadown, on the 16th of May, 577, in
the 94th year of his age, and his remains were solemnly transferred to Clonfert.
Lynch records the tradition that so great was the concourse to pay honour to our
saint, that the procession bearing his sacred relics extended the whole way from
Annadown to Clonfert, ‘‘ qui agmen ducebant, Clonfertam ante pervenerint, quam
illud claudentes Enachduna pedem extulerint.” The distance between these
towns is more than 20 miles.

St. Moenu, also called Monennus and Mainennus, was chosen by St. Brendan
to be bishop of the see and abbot of the monastery, as he himself was engaged in
establishing and watching over other religious houses. This holy religious is said
to have for some time governed the famous Abbey of Rosina in Wales, and to
have been spiritual father to the great Saints Finian of Moville, Tighernach of
Clones, Eugene of Ardsrath, Cairpre of Cuil-Raithin, and Enda of Aran. He
died before St. Brendan, on the tst of March, 571. He is styled in the Calendar
of Cashel and other ancient authorities, ‘‘ Moennius, or Mainennius, Bishop of
Cluainferta and Coarb of Brendan.” St. Fintan, surnamed Corach, was next
Bishop and Abbot of Clonfert. He is supposed to have governed for a time the
Monastery of Leamchoill, in the Diocese of Ossory, and also the famous Monastery
of Clonenagh. When taking his departure from Clonenagh, he promised its
religious that he would return to them, but this was fulfilled only after his
death, when his relics were translated thither. His festival is variously celebrated
on 21st February, 27th March, and 16th November. The name Corach is
generally interpreted to ne “chaunter” or “chorister,” and on account of his
love of chaunting the psalms, he is in some Martyrologies styled “os psalmorum.”
He died about the fa 600. cee ts

All the Martyrologies and Annals agree in styling St. Cummian Foda (i.¢., the
tall), Bishop and Abbot of Clonfert. The Annals of Tigernach mark his death, as
assigned by some authorities, to 671, but they again repeat it as follows, at 672,
which is the correct year :—* Cummine Fota, LX XXII. anno aetatis suae mortuus
est.” From this it also follows that St. Cummain Fota was born in 590. He was
son of Fiachna, of the royal race of Oilioll Olum. The AMartyrology of Donegal
styles him “ the vessel of wisdom of his time, the learned preacher of the word of
God.” St. Aingus, in his Feiré, or Metrical Catalogue of Saints, commemora-
ting his feast on the 12th November, says :—

“ Granted with wisdom
Was knowledge with great acuteness,
To my Cumain of noble championship,
The fair, tall son of Fiachna ;”

and the note is added— “ Cumin Fota, the son of Fiachna, comharb of Brendan of
Cluain-Ferta, and he was of the Eoghanact of Loch Lein. id was the rightful
name of Cumain, and Drumdalither was his church, and it was in a commonage

