--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-178.png ---
154 Ancient Monasterics of Ireland.

There appears to have been many ancient inscriptions here,
but they are all erased and destroyed by time.*

Priory of Colidei ; In the interpolations of the Udster Annals,
at the year 1130 we read, that the Moriastery of Daminis
was founded that year; the author must mean either the
repairing of the ancient Monastery of St. Laserian, or the
founding of this priory of the Colidei, or secular priests.”

* James Butler's Tour., Ms. Twiss's Tour p. 114. 7 War. Mon.

marks, every mark being but 26 groats sterling, and 2 white groats per annum,
and eight days’ cosheire in his visitation, as in Maghericoolmanny, and for want of
flesh and wine, or aquavite, four shillings, and three score sroaghans [stroans or
baunocks] of oatbread, and a beef per annum, or ten shillings in lieu of said
bread, and a noble per annum in lieu of the beef ; and it was also found that there
were three herenaghs of the said land, viz :—O’Tullie, who was chief and herenagh
of one half of the said land; O'Cassidie, who was herenagh of one quarter ; and
O'Casy, who was herenagh of the other quarter of said land ; and it was also found
that in the said barony, eight tates on the south side of Lough Erne, therein
specified, all of which, together with the tithes thereof, belonged to the late
dissolved abbey of Devenish; and that the said abbey, with one orchard and more,
were situate in the island of Devenish, and that out of the said abbey the Bishop of
Clogher had yearly a refection for a day, or ten shillings in lieu thereof, and not
else, but not to stay all night. And it was also found that the late priory, or
house of secular priests of Collidea, with an orchard thereunto belonging, was
likewise situate in the said island of Devenish, and that to said priory belonged
four tates of land in the said barony, viz. :—two tates of Fanagrane, and two tates
of Tullagh; and that out of the said priory the Bishop of Clogher had a beef per
annum. or twenty groats in lieu thereof. And it was also found that the two small
tates of Gorticloghem and Farrenerioght, in the pecen of Derrimoillan (Derry-
vullan), were parcel of the possessions of the said Priory of Collidea.

Doctor Reeves, in his ‘‘ Essay on the Culdees” ( 7runsactions of the Royal Irish
Academy, vol. xxiv., p. 140), referring to the foundation of St. Molaisi, states,
though without quoting his authority, that in the twelfth or thirteenth century
a body of regular canons superseded the ancient community of the island, and
became possessed of their church and endowments, allowing, however, a small
society of secular canons, probably the representatives of the original occupants,
to remain, but in a subordinate position. At the dissolution of monasteries, there
were two conventual societies on the island—one a priory of regular canons, and
the other described as ‘‘ the late priory or house of secular priests in the same
island, with an orchard thereunto belonging, and four tathes of land possessed by
Rory Ballogh O'Corcon” (recte, Corcron), ‘‘as corbe ; the tithes of which were
possessed by the Prior O'Flanagan of the abbey.” In a patent of James I., the

wildings are described as a cell or chapel called Cal/dca, alias Colldea, in said
island, to said abbey, near and belonging. In the table annexed to the Martyr-
ology of Donegal (under Molaissi), Michael O’Clery writes in 1630:—‘ Ubi
prioratus saecularis Colideorum, pertinens ad templum magnum ecclesiae parochi-
alis 8S. Molassi (ita antiquitus), et vicaria ar ecclesiae.' The house of these
secular priests appears to have been a relic of the ancient establishment of St.
Molaisi, who were superseded by the regular canons, and to whom they stood in
the same relation that the Colidei of Armagh did to the cathedral chapter.”

St. Natalis, otherwise Naile, referred to in the text of Archdall as immediate
successor of St. Laserian, is thus mentioned in the Calendar of the O’Clerys, at
27th January :—

“*Naile, of Inbher Naile, in Tir-Baghuine, in Cinel-Conaill” (now the parish
of Inver, barony of Banagh, county Donegal), ‘‘and afterwards Abbot of Cill-
Naile” (now incorrectly anglicized Kinawley, the name of an old church and
parish in the barony of Knockninny, in the County of Fermanagh, extending into
the barony of Tullyhaw, in the County of Cavan, where his well of pure spring
water is still in existence, according to O'Donovan’s Note in Four Mastcrs, at

