--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-270.png ---
242 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

A monastery was founded here in the year 1464, by O’Con-
chovar [O’Connor], Prince of Kerry, for Franciscan friars of
the Strict Observance.4

Other writers erroneously give this foundation to the Lord
John O'Connor, and place it in the year 1478.

On the suppression, the abbey was granted to James Scolls.*
It was afterwards granted for the term of twenty-one years to
Sir Edward Denny, at the annual rent of 71s. and 1446

4 Act. SS. ~.657. * War. MS. vol. 34, p. 164. * Smith, p. 227. © Aud. Gen.

were reckoned by our forefathers “‘ great monuments of the power, civilization, and
piety of O’Connor, Prince of Kerry.”

In the same barony of Iraghtyconnor is the parish of Killahinny, in Irish Cxd/-
Eithne, i.e., the Church of St. Eithne. ‘Another parish bears the name of Kil-
naughtin, i.¢., the Church of St. Neachtain, and there is also a holy well called
Tober-Nagthin, dedicated to the same saint. The present ruins of Kilnaughtin are
about four centuries old, but according to the Ordnance Survey, there can be no
doubt that the present building occupies the site ofa more ancient church. In the
townland of Termon East, in this parish, is another holy well called Tober Martin,
dedicated to St. Martin, and another sacred to St. Senan, of Iniscathy. There
are also the ruins of an old church at At//murri/y, which means the Church of St.
Murghal. .

On Carrick island, in the parish of Aghavallen, are the ruins of anold abbey. The
edifice, like that of Lislaghtin, consisted of a nave and choir, with a square tower
over the choir arch.

The parish of Lisse/ton derives its name from “the earthen fort of St. Eiltin.”
This saint is generally called St. Elteen of Kinsale, and his feast is on the 1th
December. The site of the old Church of St. Elteen is now occupied by the modern
Protestant church, The parish of Kilconly, #.e., Church of St. Connla, honours its

atron on the 10th May. The old church of this parish is situated in the town-

d of Kilconly, in a glen on the north side of a mountain stream. It is in good
preservation, and measures on the inside 42 feet 6 inches in length, and 22 feet in

readth, and its walls are 4 feet in thickness, and g feet in height, and built of
small hammered stones and lime and sand cement.

The parish of Dysart was originally called Desertua de Triallagh, i.e. “ the her-
mitage of St. Triallagh,” and this saint is the patron of the parish. M(‘Firbis

Genealogies of the Irish SS., R.1.A., page 253) gives the following story regarding

t. Triallagh :—“Fearamhla, the daughter of Dioma-Dubh, was the mother of the
three O'Suanys, and also of Aidan, of C/uain-Eochaille, in Corran. She was also
the mother of Diclethe-O’Triallaigh, whose cell is in the territory of Ciarraigh
Luachra; and she was also the mother of Colman, the son of Eochy, of Shanbo,
in Hy-Kinsellagh. These are called the saints of the Hy-Neathaeh-Moy. . . -
St. Dicleth-O Triallagh, commonly called 7yiallach, iz. ‘‘ the wanderer,” secretly
went away from Tyrawley, and settled at Disert-O’ Triallaigh, on the brink of
Casan Ciarraighe (now the river Cashen.) A great miracle was performed on him
when he resolved to go away from his mother's sons on a journey to look for God.
They took him and bound tim, and put an iron fetter on his Fea and feet, and
they flung the key of the fetter into the ocean. Nevertheless, the saint persevered,
and went to Disert-Triallaigh sailing in a curach without a hide, round the west
of Ireland. On his arrival there, the key of the fetter was found to have been
miraculously brought before him to Disert-Triallaigh. This fetter,” adds M ‘Firbis,
“is still preserved as a miraculous reliquary, and is known by the name of G/asan-
Triallaigh. The reason why he is called Dic/eth is because he concealed himself
when flying from his brothers.”

In the parish of Ga/ey, there is also a small fragment of the old gable of a church
in the graveyard. About halfa mile to the east of it is the well of St. Bartholo-
mew, who is patron of the parish.

