--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-172.png ---
148 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

Derough > There was a corbeship here, which was in the
nature of a collegiate church ; and Archbishop Usher tells
us, that a corbeship was subject to the visitation of the bishop,
and sometimes also was sequestered by him in like manner as
other ecclesiastical places were. This corbeship, with its
possessions, was vested in the crown on the general suppression
of religious houses *

© Sir Fohn Davis's Letter to the Earl of Salisbury. Collectanea, No. 2,
PP. 156, 190.
in the barony of Clanawlie was the parish of Clenys, the parish church whereof
stood in the island of Clenys, in which parish was both a parson and viccar colla-
tive, that the tithes were paid in kind, one-fourth part to the Bishop of Clogher,
another fourth part to the viccar, and the other two fourth parts to the parson, the
parish church to be repaired by the parson and vicar, bearing one-third part, and
the herenagh the other two-third parts. And it was also found that in the said
parish were three acres of glebe, or thereabouts, belonging to the viccarage of
Clenys ; and that the said parson paid unto the Bishop of Clogher yerelie proxies,
8s., and the viccar 4s. ; and that the bounds of said parish were as followeth, viz. :
it extends unto the half-barony of Tircannada, and boundeth upon Lough M‘Kealie;
on the north and north-east upon the bog of Eskenanawde, in the barony of
Magheristeffanagh ; and on the south upon the river of Bealaghinmlagh, within
the said barony of Clonawlie ; and on the west, to the hill of Dromboy, ia the
same barony.”

The Annals of the Four Masters make the following references to this island :—

A.D. 1394. Mathew MacGilla-Coisgle, Vicar of Claoin-inis, died.

1423. Maurice, the son of Matthew, son of Osgar Maguire, Archdeacon of
Clogher, Parson of Aghalurcher, and Lord of Claoin-inis, died on the 6th of the
Calends of May.

1450. Pierce Maguire, Bishop of Clogher, died at Cleenish, and was interred at
Lisgool. :

1489. Brian O’Corcran, Vicar of Cleenish,a 1d Denis MacGilla-Coisgle, Erenagh
and Vicar of Derrybrusk, died.

1495. John Maguire, the son of Pierce, son of Maurice, Parson of Doire-Maelain
[Derryvullan] and Erenagh of Cleenish, who kept a house of general hospitality,
and the Parson O'Elay (Patrick) died.

1515. James, the son of Thomas Roe, son of the Abbot Maguire, was slain by
Maguire, the Coarb, on the land of Cleenish. Gilla-Patrick O’Hultachain, Parson
of Achadh-beithe (Aghavea in the same county), died the same year.

1518. Hugh, the son of Rossa, son of Thomas Oge Maguire, Canon Chorister
at Clogher, Parson of Aghalurcher and Parson of Cleenish, in Lough Ere, a hos-
pitable and cheerful man, and learned ecclesiastic, died.

1524. Ross, son of Rory, son of Thomas Oge Maguire, was drowned in the
port of Cleenish, after having carried off a prey from the son of Maguire, i.¢.,
Gilla-Patrick, the son of Conor. 7

In 1704 the Rev. Charles Scolloge, aged 58, residing at Mullaghdon. where
there is now a Catholic chapel of ease, was parish priest of Clenish, having re-
ceived holy orders, May, 1670. in Dublin, from the martyred Primate, Oliver Plunket.

® Derough.—Sir John Davies, whom Archdall gives as his authority for this
corbeship, merely states that it was in the County of Fermanagh, but affords no
clue to its precise locality, nor does the name appear in the Fermanagh Inquisi-
tions published by the Record Commissioners. It seems. however, to have been
one of the two Dooras, near Edernagh, in the present civil parish of Drumkeeran,
formerly part of the ecclesiastical parish of Magheraculmoney and barony of Lure
granted, with other lands, to Thomas Blennerhasset_by James I. ; and in whicl
parish there was, in that king’s reign, the chapel of Ballioconnell, having one tate
of land, whereof O'Connelly was Herenagh, paying to the Bishop of Clogher
2s. 8d. yearly ; the name, however, has disappeared from the Ordnance Survey of
Fermanagh.

in the above named parish of Magheracoolmoney, on two islands lying near


