--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-234.png ---
208 Ancicnt Monasteries of Ireland.

the streets of Galway.” One of the few old Irish vestiges that all their efforts
could not efface is the well dedicated to St. Brendan, near the Quay; and O'Flaherty
writes that in his time St. Brendan's feast, on the 16th May, was, by those living
on the Quay, observed as a strict holiday.

A noble residence or college having been built for the clergy by the citizens,
and especially through the munificence of Dominick Lynch, surnamed Dudh, who
died in 1502, the sanction of the Cistercian Order was duly obtained, and the
Church of St. Nicholas, hitherto subject to Knockmoy Abbey, was, about the year
1480, erected into a collegiate church by Donat O’Murry, Archbishop of Tuam,
and in the terms of his erection a Guardian or Warden and eight choral Vicars
were attached to it. He at the same time granted to it the Church of Ballyclare,
and other endowments. These acts of the Archbishop were approved and confirmed
by Pope Innocent VIII., by Brief dated 6th of the Faes of February, 1484. Arch-
bishop O’Murry passed to a better life early in 1484, but his successor, Ullic Joy,
or Joyce, on the 7th August, faithfully carried out the arrangements approved by
the Sovereign Pontiff, and added other considerable endowments. The Warden
was elected each year by the Mayor and citizens of Galway, and his election was
ratified by the Vicars-Choral. These, too, were elected by the Mayor and citizens,
and received their confirmation from the Warden.

Galway, from the year 1600 to 1650, was reckoned the most important city of
the kingdom after Dublin. It was particularly remarkable for its school, and the
old Annals of the city under the year 1608, relate that “at this period there was
a famous school, containing twelve hundred scholars, kept in Galway by Alexander
Lynch.” The office of schoolmaster was a perilous one in those times, and we
learn from the Patent Rolls of the 16th James I., that the commissioners ap-
pointed to inquire into the state of the kingdom recommended that ‘‘a constant
course be held in execution of the laws for compelling His Majesty's subjects to
attend the preaching of the word and hearing of divine service, for suppressing of
Popish schools, establishment of schoolmasters, weeding out Popish priests,” &c.
(A.D. 1613. Rot. Pat. 16 Jac. I., p. 3, No.6). Notwithstanding the severe laws
against the Catholic schoolmasters, Galway or its neighbourhood continued to be
a favorite resort for Irish scholars, and Dr. John Lynch, Archdeacon of Tuam,
and Dr. James Lynch, subsequently Archbishop of Tuam, maintained the fame
of the courage and ability of the Galway schoolmasters. .

In the Library of Trinity College, Dublin, there is a valuable MS., written in
the reign of Charles the First, containing the Annals of Galway, from which
we take the following extracts: —

A.D. 1513. “Stephen Lynch Fitzdominick, being on a voyage, the Convent
of the Hill, dedicated to St. Augustine, was built by one Margaret Athey, his wife.
The said Stephen, on landing, finding this work in a manner perfected, questioned
who built this work? It was replied that it was his wife, and he commended the
work. It is added that this lady was remarkable for her piety, and made a
pilgrimage to St. Iago in Galicia, and that she was only prevented by her infirmi-
ties from proceeding to the Holy Land. ‘The above-named Stephen founded
the hospital, or poor men’s house, in High-stréet ; and he also removed the ditch
from Leam Teig, near the town walls, and the Corporation gave him the lands near
the same.’

A.D. 1522. “ This year it was enacted that no man should be made a freeman
of the city, unless he spoke English, and agreed to have his upper lip weekly
shaved, under penalty of £20.

A.D. 1539. “John French, alias Skane-i-Tallen, so called from the abundance
of salt which he brought to the country, built the north side of the body of St.
‘Nicholas’s Church, from the north pinnacle to the chapel of the sacrament ; he also
built the great.chapel which lieth in the south side of St. Francis’s Abbey, in the
north of Galway, together with the stone house that stands over the river annexed
to the west pinnacle of the said abbey, called ‘ John French’s Chamber.’

A.D. 1563. ‘On Saturday, the 15th of January, Theobald, Lord Viscount Mayo,
was shot to death at Galway.

A.D. 1643. “On Sunday, the 18th of June, Mass was solemnly sung in St.
Nicholas'’s Church of Galway. On Sunday, the 25th of June, Mass was first
solemnly sung in St. Francis’s Abbey; and upon the same day the fort of St. Austin,

