--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-256.png ---
228 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

Aghamore ;* Situated in a small island called Abbey Isle,
near the mouth of the river Kenmare, and adjoining the ex-
treme end of the parish of Kilcroghan.

This small abbey was founded in the 7th century by the
monks of the Abbey of St. Finbar, near Cork, for canons
regular following the rule of St. Augustine. The walls, which
yet remain, of this ancient abbey are so beaten by the sea, that
in a very short time they will probably be demolished.

At low water the Isle of Abbey joins the mainland‘

Ardfert ;*** Is a small decayed village in the barony of
Clanmaurice, yet is the see of a bishop, and a borough, sending
burgesses to Parliament.

! War. Mon. and Smith's History, p.94. * Crlled anciently Ardart, Ardfeart-
ys
brenn, or Ardbreinn,

following note :—'‘ There is one prebend left of the ruined Church of Aghadoe,
called Inishouell, value per annum twenty shillings, being the tithes of two
plowlands in the parish of Templedrum.”

In the townland of Knockreer, in the parish of Aghadoe, there is a curious stone
called Cloghmacuda, which 1s traditionally believed to have been sanctified by the
penitential exercises of St. Muchuda, and to retain the impression of the saint’s
knees.

Smith, in History of Kerry (page 147) asserts that the Cathedral of Aghadoe
was dedicated to St. Finnian The o.d Abbey at Inisfallen was certainly dedi-
cated to this saint ; but from the words of the Asmu/s of /nisfallen given above,
it seems manifest that the cathedral itself was dedicated to the Most Holy
Trinity, In the Catholic Church the Sees of Aghadoe and Ardfert were con-
sidered to be distinct, and as late as the beginning of the last century. we find
Aeneas O’Leyne Vicar Apostolic of Aghadove, whilst, at the same time, Donagh
Moriarty held the office of Vicar Apostolic of Ardfert.

3 In the Martyroloyies of Tallaght and Donegal, ‘* St. Loarn, Priest of Achadh-
more,” is honored on the 30th of August. The Augustinian convent erected
there in later times was said to be a branch-house of the Abbey of Molanna, in
the County Waterford.

3 Ardfert is interpreted in the old Latin Life of St. Brendan to mean “the hill of
miracles,” and it probably derived its name from the wonderful gift of miracles
bestowed by God on St. Brendan and his disciples. In the 4nza/s of Inisfallen,
and other early records, the see is sometimes called Ayferte or Iferte, i.¢.,
“*the land of miracles.”

St. Brendan was one of the most illustrious saints that adorned the Church in
this island, and he is deservedly ranked by our ancient chroniclers among *‘the
twelve Apostles of Erin.” The following particulars of his life are taken from the
preface of the Acta Sancti Brendani, edited by Right Rev. Dr. Moran, in 1872 :—

The Latin Life of St. Brendan, preserved in the famous Codex Kilkenniensis of
Marsh’s Library, when treating of the birth of our saint, merely states in general
terms that he was born “ in that western district of Munster which is called Kerry ;”
and from the narrative which is added, it is manifest that the place of his baptism
was not far distant from his home. Zhe /rish Life identifies the spot where St.
Brendan was baptized as Tubber-na-Afolt, or ‘* The Wedders’ Well,”” which is
situated in the townland of Tubrid, not far from Ardfert : and it adds, that ‘‘ the
precise place of his birth was Ad/traighe Caille, situated in Ciarraighe Luachra.” —
(Book of Lismore. fol. 72). That portion of Kerry which extends from the slopes
of Sliebh-Lougher to the sea was anciently known as Ciarraighe Luachra ; and
Alltraighe Caille seems to have designated the lesser district almost wholly com-
prised between Ardfert, Fenit, and Tralee. However, the Tract entitled Navi-
GATIO SANCTI BReNDANI has one phrase which may, perhaps. serve to define still
more closely the birthplace of our saint. It says: “e¢ Staynili regione Momonien-~

