--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-183.png ---
County of Fermanagh. 157

bishop of Clogher a fat beef annually, or twenty groats in lieu
of it. .

The Herinagh of Devenish contains four quarters of the
new measure, beside the island which was free ; it paid
annually to the Bishop of Clogher four marcs, each marc
being twenty-six groats, with the liberty to coshire therein for
eight nights at his visitation, and sixty loaves (in Irish
stroughans) of oaten meal (or in lieu thereof Ios.) a fat ox
(or 6s. 8d. in lieu thereof) ; there were three erenarchs of this
land, viz., O’Tully the first, and he was erenarch of half of the
said land ; and O’Casy, erenarch of the other part ; and there
were eight tates of land of the ancient small measure, on the
fourth bank of the river of Loghern, belonging to the said
canons, viz..—Drumgemple, two tates; Enislern, Rosleagh,
Moynenergidi, Findraught and Charranchirrin, Magherine-
gananah, and Fogher ; and the prior to pay annually to the
Bishop of Clogher one refection on the day of his visitation,
but not to tarry all the night (or ros. in lieu of the said
refection.)*

Domhnagh-Mor => In Magh-ene,™ St. Nennidhius, or
Nennius, was abbot and bishop here ;* this place is now
unknown.

Gola 6 Adjoining Lough-Earn, five miles south-east of
Enniskillen, and within three miles of Maguire’s bridge.

® King, p. 238, &c. ** A small territory to the south of the river Erne,
having the lough to the east, and the ocean to the west ; in this territory are the ruins
of several churches. * Act. SS. pp. 113 and 115.

5 There are several Saints Nennius in the Ca/endar of Donezal, but none of them
appropriated to this church. According to the 7ripartite Life of St. Patrick, this
church was founded by him :—‘‘ Patrick went afterwards past Druim-cliabh
(Drumcliff) from Caisel-Ivra, by the Rosses eastwards, along Magh-Eni, and
founded Domhnach-mor of Magh-Eni.” This small territory of Magh-Eni was
sometimes called Magh-Cedne and Moggene, and is now called “the Moy,” a
plain lying between the rivers Erne and Drowes, in the south of the County

jonegal. Some have supposed that Domhnachmore is in the parish of Inish-
macsaint, where, in the vicinity of Carrick-lake, are the ruins of an ahcient church.

As however Carrick-lake is not situate in Magh-Ene, it is more probable that
Domhnachmor is identical with Tigh Tunny, an ancient graveyard lying on the
south bank of the Erne, half a mile west of Belleek, where formerly existed the
ruins of an abbey, the stones of which some forty years ago were used to form the
wall which at present surrounds the little graveyard. The name Tigh ‘unny may
be a corruption or transformation of the name of the founder, St. Ninny, or St.
Dianach, who is said to have been Bishop at Donaghmore in Magh-Ene. The
situation of Tigh Tunny is within the territory of Magh-Ene, and though not
within the limits of the County Fermanagh, it is on the confines of same, in the
townland of Clyhore, and County Donegal. Here also isa holy well and little
island close by in the Erne, where was formerly held a station on a day not well
remembered now in the locality. The river scenery of the Eme at this spot is
surpassingly beautiful.

Gola is now the name of a townland in the parish of Derrybrusk, barony of
Magherastephana, county Fermanagh. There is another townland of the same
name in the parish of Aghavea, same barony and county. When Lewis’s Topo-
graphical Dictionary of Ireland was compiled in 1837, some ruins of the ancient


