--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-211.png ---
County of Galway. 185

A.D. 650. St. Nemius, or Nehemias Hua Birn, called the
comorb of St. Endeus, died the 19th of June this year.«

The tomb of St. Nemius is shewn in the church-yard of
another church in this island, called Teglagh-Enda.!

Act. SS. p.715, and Tr, Th. p. 182. | See Colgan, p. 21, and Butler, vol.iii. p. 253.

feelings of deep devotion, which the gorgeous artificial music of the modern
cathedral but too rarely excites even in minds most predisposed to feel its
influences and appreciate its refinement. In short, these ancient temples are just
such humble, unadorned structures as we might expect them to have been; but,
even if they were found to exhibit less of that expression of congruity and fitness,
and more of that humbleness so characteristic of a religion not made for the rich,
but for the poor and lowly, that mind is but little-to be envied which could look
with apathy on the remains of national structures so venerable for their antiquity,
and so interesting as being raised in honour of the Creator in the simplest ages of
Christianity.’

“But where, it may be asked, did all these religious men live? How were they
sheltered from the Atlantic tempests of which the first fury was necessarily spent
on the beetling cliffs of Aran? How were they protected from the wintry cold,
and from the rain?

“Let not our readers expect, in answer to this question, a description of any vast
structure sufficient for the adequate accommodation of communities as large as
those that were housed in the stately monasteries of the middle ages. In Aran, as
elsewhere in Ireland, the early monastic establishments were com; of separate
cells for the abbot, monks, and clergy, while the houses required for the accommo.
dation of strangers, the kitchen, etc., were all separate edifices, surrounded by a
cashel or circular wall, and forming a kind of monastery or ecclesiastical town,
like those of the early Christians in the East, and known among the Eg: ptians by
the name of Laura. The Laura herein differed from the Coenobium, that the
latter was but one habitation where the monks lived in common, whereas the
former consisted of many cells divided from each other. Such groups of cells are
frequently mentioned in the Lives of the Irish Saints.

“ These structures, it is fair to assume, were formed of the materials within easy
reach of the builders, and consequently, in many parts of Ireland, of perishable
materials, such as wood and clay. For this reason few vestiges of them remain in
the northern and eastern portions of the island. But in the west and south, many
such buildings yet survive ; and of these we found interesting specimens in
Aranmore. There, writes O'Flaherty, ‘they have cloghauns, a kind of building
of stones laid one upon another. which are brought to a roof, without any manner
of mortar to cement them, some of which cabins will hold forty men on their floor ;
so ancient that nobody knows how long ago any of them was made. Scarcity of
wood and store of fit stones, without peradventure, found out the first invention.’
These houses are of a circular or oval form, having dome roofs, constructed without
a knowledge of the principle of the arch, and without the use of cement. They
are formed upon the model left by the pagan Firbolg and Tuatha de Danaan
tribes, as is obvious from the resemblance they bear to the pagan circular stone
forts. One remarkable difference between the houses of the pagan and Christian
periods, is, that whereas the former are round internally and externally, the latter,
though externally round, are occasionally quadrangular in the interior, as if the
quadrangular form of the churches had been adopted also for the houses of
ecclesiastics. Whole villages of these houses exist on Aranmore.

“The neighbouring island of Ardillaun still exhibits the Laura, founded by
St. Fechin in the seventh century, which is one of the most interesting and best
preserved anchoretical establishments in Ireland, or perhaps in Europe. On the
crest of the hill, on which Tempull Benain stands, about 13 feet to the north-
west of the sacred edifice, there was a cloghaun, partly under the ground, 10 feet
in length, and 5 feet 4 inches in breadth; the doorway was more than 2
feet broad, and the walls 3 feet thick. O’Donovan, who describes it, is of
opinion that it was probably the house of St. Benignus himself, Our interest

