--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-197.png ---
County of Galway. 171

Tuam, in Imaney, or O’Kelly’s country, in the barony of
Tiaquin.

An abbey, under the invocation of the Virgin Mary, was
founded here for Cistercians in the year 1189, or 1190, by
Cathol O’Conor, surnamed Crove-derge, or Red-Hand,
King of Connaught. This house was a daughter of the abbey
of Boyle.&

* Pembridge. * Ann. Munst. and B. V. M. D. and Stal. Cister. © War.
Cenob. p. 75.
fulfilment of a vow, when he achieved a great victory on this spot over Sir
Amoric St, Lawrence, who was slain in the battle. It was granted by its founder
to the Cistercians, and from the occasion of its erection is often called in medizval
records ‘‘ Monasterium Sanctae Mariae de Colle Victoriae.” There are still some
fine remains of the ancient abbey. ‘‘Several capitals of pillars, beautifully
sculptured, lie about the churchyard. The chancel is vaulted with stone; and on
the north wall is the tomb of the founder ; but that which gives most interest to
this ruin are the remains of the frescoes on the north side of the chancel. The
martyrdom of St. Sebastian is one of the subjects represented, and though mde in
design and faded in colour, the paintings are inestimably interesting to the
antiquary, as the most authentic memorials of ancient Irish costumes now to be
found. The inscriptions on the wall, while they show that the paintings are not
of the time of Cathal O'Connor, yet prove them incontrovertibly to belong to the
13th or 14th century.”"—AZ. Stokes, ‘‘ Christian Inscriptions,” vol. ii., page 82,
One of these paintings represents the Crucifixion of our Lord, with the Blessed
Virgin and St. John at the foot of the cross. This painting is in the recess of an
arch which still remains, and over which is artistically carved a man’s head,
wearing a crown. This is traditionally believed to represent the royal founder,
Cathal Croibhderg.

1190. The Chief of Muntir-Murchada, with the consent of Cathal, King of
Connaught, granted the town or village of Lismacuan, in Clanfergail, to C.D.
Abbot, and to the Abbey of Knockmoy, the witnesses present being Cathal, King
of Connaught ; E.D., his son; C., Archbishop of Tuam; H., Bishop of
Aghado ; L. Bishop of Elphin; D. Earl of Maglur; T. O'Flanagan; D.
Maccoiraghty, and T. Cormacain Cantore.

1201. This year Cardinal Johanes de Monte-Celio came to Ireland as the
Pope's Legate, and convened a great synod at Dublin. All the bishops, abbots,
priests, friars. monks, &c., with many of the nobility, were present.

1211. Roderick, son of Roderick, the son of Torlough O’Connor, was slain
by the people of Lieney, in Connaught. He was interred at Knockmoy.

1217. More, or Mary, daughter of Donald O’Brien, and wife of Cathal Croibh-
dearg (the founder of this abbey) died, and was interred here with great solemnity.

1218. Loughlin O’Conor, a man who was remarkable for his piety and hospi-
tality, died at the monastery here. The Annals of the Four Masters thus record
his death :—" Loughlin O’Conor died in the Monastery of Cnoc Muaidhe.”

1224. The Monastery of St. Francis, at Athlone, in the diocese of Clonmacnoise,
on the east bank of the Shannon, was erected by the founder of Knockmoy
Abbey, Cathal, King of Connaught. The Abbey of Clare Island, which was
founded this year, was afterwards annexed to Knockmoy, as appears by Sir James
Ware's Jnguiries concerning Ireland and its Antiquities, which says:—‘‘To
this convent was afterwards annexed the Cell of Cleary, in an island of the same
name in Mayo.” This year King Cathal died. His death is thus recorded in the
Annals of the Four Masters :—‘' An awful and strange shower fell in Connaught,
extending over Hy Maine, Sedain, Hy Diarmada, and other parts, followed by
terrible diseases and distémpers among the cattle that grazed on the lands where
this snow fell, and their mill produced in the persons who drank it extraordinary
internal diseases. It was manifest that these were evil omens foreboding mis-
fortunes to the people of Connaught, as they sustained irreparable loss and
calamity in the same year by the death of Cathal Crovdearg, the son of Turlogh
Mor O'Conor and King of Connaught, the man who had during a long time


