--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-213.png ---
County of Galway. 187

916. Died Egnech, bishop, anchorite, and comorb of St.
Endeus.

100. Died Flann Hua Donnchadha, comorb of St. Endeus.

1020. About this year the abbey was destroyed by fire.°

° Act. SS., p. 715.

ear 489. On the death of his father, the youthful Enda was chosen to succeed
him as head of the men of Oriel. The warlike spirit of the times took strong hold
of the young prince's heart, and we find him at an early period of his life captivated
by the love of glory, and cager to show by his military prowess that he was worthy
of the royal race from which he had sprung, and of the throne which he filled.
His holy sister Fanchea was incessant in her exertions to win for God her brother’s
heart, which, with all its defects, she knew to be chivalrous and pure. For a time
her words of warning and entreaty remained without result; but the season of
grace came soon. Enda had asked from his sister in marriage one of the royal
maidens who were receiving their education in the convent which she ruled. Fan-
chea communicated his request to the maiden: ‘ Make thou thy choice, whether
wilt thou love Him whom I love, or this earthly bridegroom? ‘Whom thou
lovest,’ was the girl's sweet reply, ‘Him also will I love.’ She died soon after,
and gave her soul to God, the spouse whom she had chosen. ‘The holy virgin,”
says the ancient life, ‘ covered the face of the dead girl witha veil, and going again
to Enda said to him: “ Young man, come and see the maiden whom thou lovest.”
Then Enda with the virgin entered the chamber where was the dead girl, and the
holy virgin uncovering the face of the lifeless maiden, said to him: “* Now look upon
the face of her whom thou didst love.” And Enda cried out: ‘‘ Alas! she is fair
no longer, but ghastly white.” ‘* So also shalt thy face be,” replied the holy virgin.
And then St. Fanchea discoursed to him of the pains of hell and of the joys of
heaven, until the young man’s tears began to flow. O! the wondrous mercy of
God in the conversion of this man to the true faith ! for even as He changed the
haughty Saul into the humble Paul, so out of this worldly prince did he make a
spiritual and a holy teacher and pastor of His people 3; for, having heard the words
of the holy virgin, despising the vanities of the world, he took the monk's habit
and tonsure, and what the tonsure signified he fulfilled by his actions.’

“‘ After having founded a monastery in his native place, St. Enda is said to have
proceeded to Rosnat in Britain, where he remained for some time under the spiri-
tual direction of St. Mansenus, or Manchan. Thence, according to the above-
mentioned life, he went to Rome, where ‘attentively studying the examples of the
saints, and preparing himself in everything for the order of priesthood, having
at length been ordained priest, he was pleasing to the most high God.’ He built
a monastery called Lactinum, or the Place of 3 and rightly so called, adds the
life, ‘ because therein the command of loving God and our neighbour was most
faithfully carried out.’ Returning to Ireland, he landed at Drogheda, and built
several churches on either side of the river Boyne. He then proceeded southwards
to visit his brother-in-law, Engus, King of Munster. from whom he asked the island
of Aran, that he might dwell thereon, The king was first unwilling to comply
with his request ; not because he was ungenerous, but because he had learned from
St. Patrick ‘not to offer to the Lord his God any lands save such as were good
and fertile, and easy of access.’ But St. Enda declared that Aran was to be the place
of his resurrection ; and at length the king made an offering of the island ‘to God
and to St. Enda,’ asking in return the blessing of the saint. Having thus obtained
possession of what he rightly deemed a place of singular retirement, and well suited

for the rigours of a penitential life, St. Enda returned to his brethren and conducted
them in safety to the island, which was then inhabited by pagans from the adjacent
coast of Clare. He divided the island into ten parts, and built thereon ten monas-
teries, each under the rule of its proper superior. He chose a place for his own
residence on the eastern coast, and there erected a monastery, the name and site of
which is preserved to this day in the little village of Kil-eany (Kill-Enda), about
a mile from Kilronan. Then began the blessed days, when the sweet odour of
penance ascended to heaven from the angelic band of monks, who, under the severe

