--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-203.png ---
SS

County of Galway. , 177

and two quarters of land commonly called Knocknemanaghe,
parcel of the abbey of Knockmoy ; annual value, besides
reprises, 20s. Irish money."

nquisition 7th October, 29th same reign, finds, that the
chapel of Aiterenan, with a quarter of land in the barony of
Tyereragh and County of Sligo, annual value, besides reprises,
13s. 4@., was parcel of the possession of this abbey.*

The parsonage of Galway did belong to this abbey,‘ as did
also the Cell of Cleary, in the County of Mayo."

There are yet to be seen some beautiful remains of this
abbey.

March 22nd, 1620, Valentine Blake, Esq., held and enjoyed
the site of this abbey, in which was a church and hall of stone
covered with shingles, a cellar under the hall, a dormitory,
cloister, an enclosure wherein was formerly another hall
and sundry buildings, three houses or cottages now within the
circuit of the said abbey ; with twelve tofts, twelve gardens, and
twelve quarters of land, viz.,the monastery quarter, alias
Carownemanesteragh ; the town and village of Coulagh, and the
four quarters commonly called the four quarters of Cnolagh ;
the two quarters of Sewenemannagh; the quarterof Moyne; the
quarter of Bealacheren ; the quarter of Kilgarrowe; the quarter
of Carroweleynnenaghlowe; the quarter of Carrownemaddagh;
all in the County of Galway, with all the tithes, alterages,
oblations, and obventions arising and accruing therefrom; a
water-mill upon the quarter called the monastery quarter;
the rectories of the church or chapel of Killoskobe, in O’Kelly’s
country, in the county of Galway ; the moiety of all the tithes,
and of all alterages, oblations, and obventions growing due out
of the four quarters of tithes in Killaskarla and Ballinagrossin,
with their appurtenances, called O’Kelly’s country; of the
four quarters as aforesaid in the town and lands of Drumnadda
and Ballinesowragh, in the said country ; four quarters of
tithes as aforesaid of all the lands, with the alterages, &c.,
yearly, out of the four quarters of the land of Moulagh Cro-
soughter, and also the rectory of the church or chapel of
Moylagh, with the moiety of the tithes in the town and lands
of Moylagh ; a moiety of all the tithes in Trosnagh and
Annaghmore; the moiety of the quarters of all the tithes in
the town and lands of Coolove ; the moiety of all the tithes
of the town and lands of Mullaghmore aforesaid ; the moiety
of all the tithes in Annaghlyne, Cargarne, and Bonlyneon ;
the moiety of all the tithes in the town and lands of Clonoran
and Cloncolgy ; the moiety of all the tithes in the town, &c.,
of Tonleghy and Ballyronane ; the moiety of all the town and

® Chief Rememb, "id, * King, p. 368. * War. Mon.
VOL. IL. XN

