--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-259.png ---
County of Kerry. 231

Sir John Wogan, Justice of Ireland, at Tristledermot, an action
against Nicholas, Bishop of Ardfert, and Odo O’Hayn, George
de Canhan, —— Bensquier, and John O’Dyny, chaplains of
the church of Ardfert, for forcibly taking from the friars of
this convent the corpse of John de Cantelupe, and burying it
elsewhere ; and also for beating and otherwise ill-using sundry
friars of this house ; the bishop at the same time prohibiting
all persons, under pain of excommunication, from furnishing

the chapel) to be done in 1453. In the choir are several very ancient tombstones,
one bearing the effigy of an abbot. Near these ruins stands Ardfert Abbey, the
mansion of the Crosbie family, who have resided here since the reign of Elizabeth.”

AMS. account of Kerry, preserved in Trinity College, Dublin (I. I. 3.) and
transcribed by O’Curry for the Ordnance Survey, gives the following short notice
of Ardfert :—‘* The barony of Clonmorris is called from the Fitzmorrises, Lords
Barons of Kerry and Lisnaw. The chief town of this barony is Ardfert, called in
Latin, Altitudo miraculorum, the name thereof in Irish so signifying. In the town
stands the ruins of a cathedral of St. Brendan, demolished in the last rebellion :
there are also the walls of four other churches, an anchorite’s cell, &c. The friary,
of which there are now remaining only ruins, was a Convent of Friars Minors,
built about the year 1359, by the Lord Patrick Fitzmorris, called on an inscription
which is there found, Dominus Kierrigiae.

In Gough's Camden, vol. iii., Ardfert is styled ‘the ancient capital of the
county, and the seat of a university, which was held in high repute.” The round
tower is described as having been 120 feet high, and built for the most part of a
dark marble. Its entrance faced the west door of the church. The Ordnance
Survey Papers further inform us, that in the present ruins “ some portions of the
primitive Cathedral of St. Brendan may still be seen. Thus, the doorway of the
original cathedral still remains in good preservation : it is placed in the west
gable. It is semi-circular, and formed of red-grit, chiselled and omamented in the
Primitive Irish style. A short distance to the north-west of the cathedral is 7eam-

U-na-hoighe, s.¢., the Church of the Blessed Virgin. It is all in the primitive

rish style, and was, when perfect, a very beautiful church. There is a rectangular
little window in the west gable towards the top. The gables are remarkably high
and sharp, and the corners are ornamented with small pillars, and the top of the
south wall has a row of projecting stones, which were ornamented with heads, now
nearly effaced.”

The Annals of Inisfalien have a few entries regarding Ardfert not noticed in
Archdall’s text :-—

A.D. 1031. O’Ruairc, commonly called an Caileach (i.¢., the cock), plundered
Ardfearta-Brenain.

A.D. 1099. Mac Craith O’Hearodain, successor of Brenan in Ardfeart, died.

A.D. 1151. Cormac O’Cuilean, burned Ardfearta-Breanain, in which were the
favorites or secretaries of Diarmod Sugach O’Conor.

A.D. 1161. Maolbreanain O’Ronain, Bishop of Anlfeart-Breanain, died.

A.D. 1166. Giolla Mac Aibhlin O’Hanamchadha, successor of St. Brendan of
Ardfert died.

A.D. 1180, Ardferta-Brenain, was ravaged and plundered by the Mac Carthys,
who also took away all the wealth and riches of the country, and slew many people
within the walls of the churchyard.

A.D. 1193. Donal O’Conairce, Bishop of Ardfert, died, and David O’Duibhti-
tibh, succeeded him in that see.

A.D. 1283. John, successor of Brendan of Ardfert, died.

In the parish of Ardfert, in the townland of Tuéridmore, there is a famous holy
well called Zudernamult, at which pilgrims still perform their ¢urrasses or peni-
tential rounds. St. Brendan is supposed to have received at this well the waters
of Baptism.

The O'Gorman MS., written about the year 1750, gives a few interesting
particulars regarding the traditional fame for learning enjoyed by the County

