--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-191.png ---
County of Fermanagh. 165

abbot, Cahill McBrian McCuchonnaght Maguire, entered into
articles with Cuchonnaght Fitz-Cuchonnaght Maguire, Lord
of the County of Fermanagh, to restore it to its pristine state.
Maguire being grieved at seeing the church, which he and the
principal people of the country had chosen for the place of
their sepulture, so nearly demolished, requested the before-
mentioned lord-abbot to surrender his title, and suffer him to

**T found in the province of Ulster
Long-blooming beauty, hereditary vigour,
Young scions of energy—

Though fair, yet fit for war, and brave.

“I found in the territory of Boyle
v a (MS. effaced),
Brehons, Erenachs, palaces,
Good military weapons, active horsemen.

**] found in the fair-surfaced Leinster,
From Dublin to Slewmargy,
Long-living men, health, prosperity,
Bravery, hardihood, and traffic.

“*I found from Ara to Gle,
In the rich country of Ossory,
Sweet fruit, strict jurisdiction,
Men of truth, chess playing.

‘I found in the great fortress of Meath
Valour, hospitality, and truth,
Bravery, purity, and mirth—

The protection of all Ireland.

“*T found the aged of strict morals
The historians recording truth—
Each good, each benefit that I have sung
In Ireland I have seen.”

The Survey of County Fermanagh (1st James I., Ul. In. xxxiv.) returns
among the spiritual lands of the barony of Clynawley, ‘The Monastery or
Abbey of Channonsg, at Lisgoole, whereunto belongeth in the same barony twenty
tathes of land and certain medders of barley, with the appurtenances of butter,
arisinge as a chief rent out of Ballymacsagart. This is éntirely possessed by Shane
Mc, an abbot for ten years past, as prior from the Pope. The Abbay of St.
Fraunces, in Lyssgoole, whereunto belongeth no landes or lyving, save onely the
gardens and croftes about yt. It is possessed by the said Shane, notwithstanding
wee find the king’s matie. intiteled to all the landes and possessions of theis 2
abbayes, by act of pliam*, enacted within this realme, in the 33rd yere of King
Henry ye Eight of famous memory, and so actually possessed thereof.”

An Inquisition held at Enniskillen 18th September, 1609, after finding the lands
belonging to Lisgoole, as stated in the text, further found that the Bishop of
Clogher was entitled out of said abbey to one meal per ann., if he came, and six
shillings and eight pence proxies, for the impropriation of Rosserririe.

The following entries, not given by Archdall occur in the Four Masters :—

A.C. 1329. Augustine, Abbot of Lisgabhail, died. O’Donovan, in his note on
this e, writes Lisgabhail, é.¢, the fort of the fork, now anglicized Lisgole,
or Lisgool.

A.C. 1345. Gilla-na-naemh O’Keenan, Abbot of Lisgabhail, died. His death
is repeated at 1348.

