--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-262.png ---
234 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

Here is a holy well, consecrated to St. Michael, which is
annually visited on the 29th of September.*

November 24th, 28th Queen Elizabeth, a lease of this abbey
was granted to John Blake for the term of 21 years, at the
yearly rent of £61 135. 4a*

Croebheach ; or Croaibech, near the river Brosnach, was
founded by St. Patrick, who placed there his disciple, St.
Daluan.” St. Trian was abbot and bishop here about the year
450.°

Dingle > A market and borough town, returning two mem-
bers to parliament, and situated in the barony of Corckaguiny.

5 Smith, p.103. * Aud. General. » Tr. Th. pp. 266 and 270. * Act. SS.
P. 725-

side, but nearly square on the inside. The walls are very rudely formed of
enormous stones. This island is sometimes called é#iswasal, or ‘‘the noble
island.” A holy well, dedicated to St. Finan, is situated on the north shore of
the lake. The pattern was held on the 16th of March, St. Finan’s day.

In the parish of Glenbeagh there is a holy well called 7sdder-ui-Chaoil, ie,
“ Toberykeel.” St. Gregory is patron of the parish, and his day, on the 12th
March, was kept as a holiday.

The parish of Kilerohan honors St. Crochan as patron. North-west of the
church is St. Crochan’s well. St. Crochan, a/ias St. Mochrua, is commemorated
in our calendars on the 3rd August, but the people here observe it on the Ist of
August. In this parish is Derrynane Abbey, in Irish Doire-Fhionain, i.e. ‘‘the
grove of St. Finan.” It is only about 4 miles from Logh Luigehach. In this
parish is also the celebrated Staigue fort, which is a circular cyclopean fort, built of
loose stones without cement of any kind, situated on a rising spot of id.

5 Dingle is the chief town in the barony of Corcaguiny, and it would seem as if
this little western promontory was, in early times, wholly devoted to purposes of
religion. In 1852, one of our eminent antiquaries thus wrote of Corcaguiny:—“ Here,
indeed, would the antiquary be tempted to designate this western tongue of land as
the Baalbec of Ireland, if not of western Europe. I some time since amused myself
by making out from the Ordnance Survey Maps and other sources of my own,
a tabular list of the principal remains of antiquity in the barony of Corcaguiny,
and I found them to be as follows :—eleven stone cahirs, three cairns, forty obsolete
burial-grounds, ten castles, eighteen artificial caves, twenty-one churches in ruins,
and nine church sites, two hundred and eighteen cloghauns or bee-hived shaped
stone houses, sixteen cromlechs, twelve large stone crosses, three hundred and
seventy-six raths, one hundred and thirteen immense rude standing stones, fifty-
four monumental pillars, most of them bearing Ogham inscriptions; fifteen oratories,
nine penitential stations, sixty-six wells, many of them bearing the name of
some saint; and twenty-nine miscellaneous remains. The list, of course, only
applies to such antiquities as have had some remains of them existing some years
ago, when I compiled the list." —(7rans. Kilkenny Arch. Soc., vol. ii bee 136.)

Among the most remarkable of these early Christian monuments of Corcaguin)
are the two oratories of Gallerus and Kilmalkedar, and the Church of Kil-
malkedar. Of the first named, Dr. Stokes, President of the R.IA., thus
writes :—‘ Among these early oratories, of which some were built with and some
without cement,the most interesting, because the most perfect, specimen, is that of
Gallerus (in Irish, Gall-voss). It is admirably built, with steep, though not
vertical, gables, and a small east window and square-headed door, with
inclined jambs. A section would give the form of the somewhat depressed Gothic
arch, but the structure shows no knowledge of the principle of the arch, being
covered in, as is seen in pagan sepulchres, and even in the later stone-roofe
churches, by the slight projection of each superimposed stone, until the work
meets at the top. On the summit of each gable is a stone socket, obviously fitted

