--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-272.png ---
244 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

Mary, was founded at Odorney, otherwise called Kyrie Eleison,
in the year 1154, and was supplied with monks from the Cis-
tercian abbey of Magio, in the County of Limerick. Keating
fixes its foundation in the year 1161.

A.D. 1186. Christian O’Conarchy, Bishop of Lismore, and
Apostolic Legate, having retired from the world, died in this
abbey, and was there interred in this year.

1188. The Abbot Nicholas was made Bishop of Ardfert
this year. He continued to fill that see during the space of
forty-eight years.!

Thomas was abbot of this house, and was also abbot of
Fermoy ; he was the fifth son of Maurice Lord’ Kerry, who
died about the year 1303.™

1410. This year we find that AEneas O'Cormac, the abbot
of Odorney, was fined tos. but we are not told for what
offence."

Gerald, third son of Patrick Lord Kerry, was abbot of this
house ; his brother Nicholas was made Bishop of Ardfert in
1420.°

1537. This being a very rich abbey, Edmund Lord Kerry
was created Baron of Odorney and Viscount Kilmaule ; in the

‘ War. Mon, _* War. Mon. and Bps. p.451. \ War. Bps. .451. ™ Lodge,
vol. 2, p.103.  ® Harris's MSS. vol. 4. ° Lodge, Ibid. p. 105.

fonti et de Dublina abbatibus committitur auctoritate capituli generalis, ut dictam
restitutionem exequantur, ct contra accusatores dicti abbatis diligenter inquirant,
et eos puniant secundum quod videbitur expedire.” Towards the close of Eliza-
beth’s reign the abbey, with a great part of its possessions which had passed into
the hands of Sir William Lovelace, was purchased by Patrick Crosbie, of Mary-
borough, in Queen’s County.

In the ruins of the abbey is a small limestone flag with the inscription :—“ Am-
brosius Piers, Vicarius Generalis Dioecesis Ardfertensis, hunc tumulum sibi fieri
curavit anno 1687.”

In the same barony is the parish of Kilflin, which honours St. Flann as patron,
and Kilcarha, in Irish Ci//-Carthaigh, in which the old church was dedicated to St.
Carthage. There is in this parish a townland formerly called Killbinnaun, in
memory of the Church of St. Benignus, which was erected there ; now it is called
Monument-farm. There is also the parish of Kiltomy, i.e., “the Church of St.
Toma,” whose festival is kept on the 22nd of April : one of its townlands is called
Killaspicktarvin, i.e, “ the Church of Bishop Tarvin,” and probably it is the only
record that preserves the name of this holy bishop. Other ancient parishes are
Killfeighney, “ Church of St. Fiachna ;” Kilshinnan, “ Church of St. Senanus ;”
Kilmoyly, “Church of St. Maoile ;” and Killahan, “Church of St. Laithin.”
Killoory honours St. Lurach Mac Cunach as patron on 17th February. His holy
well still remains, and not far from it, on the townland of Kilmore, are pointed out
the sites on which its seven churches once stood. In the parish of Ballyhaigue
is the old Church of St. Mac Deaghaidh, whom Smith erroneously calls Afac [da :
a holy well of the saint is situate on the sea shore to the east of the church. A
rude image of the saint is said to have been held in great veneration here, espe-
cially by a colony from the County Clare that settled in this neighbourhood
some centuries ago. In the same parish, about two miles from Kerry Head point,
is Teampull Dasthlionn, dedicated to St. Daithlinn. Her holy well is also
pointed out. She is supposed to have been sister to St. Mac Deaghaidh,

