--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-205.png ---
County of Galway. 179

St. Cuan, of Ath-ascrath, died A.D. 788.

Ahaskerath is now a parish church in the diocese of Elphin.

Aull Farannain ; A monastery of this name was situated in
some part of Connaught, and was given by Tipraid, Prince
of Hy-Fiachria,> to St. Columb, who placed St. Farannan
over it. We know nothing farther of this abbey.

The Isles of Arran ;* Three islands in the western ocean,

* Act. SS. p. 251. > Hy-Finchria-aidhne contained the present baronies of
Leitrim, Loughvreagh, Kiltartan, Doonkillen. Athenree and Clare, in the County
of Galway. ° Tr. Th. p. 440. ¢ These islands are counted to be in the half
barony of Arran, and are commontly called the Great Isle, the Small East Island,and
the Island of Inishmain. The second Act of Settlement.

« When Colgan was preparing his Acta Sanctorum Hiberniae for publication, he
received from Dr. Malachy O’Kealy, Archbishop of Tuam, a description of all
the churches of that diocese, from which he published, in the Appendix to S¢.
Enda's Life, the following portion that referred to the Aran Islands :—

“ Of the three Islands of Aran and their churches—

1, ‘The parish church, commonly called Xi#/-Enda, lies in the County of Gal-
way, and half barony of Aran, and in it St. Endeus, or St. Enna, is venerated as
patron on the 21st of March.

2. ‘*The church called Zeglach-Enda, to which is annexed a cemetery, wherein
is the sepulchre of St. Endeus, with one hundred and twenty-seven other sepul-
chres, wherein none but saints were ever buried.

3. “The church called Zempull Mac Longa, dedicated to St. Mac Longius, is
situated near the parish church, which is called sometimes Xs//-Enda, that is, the
Car or cellof St. Endeus, and sometimes 7empull mor Enda, or the great church
of Endeus,

4. “The church called Zempul! Mic Canonn, near the aforesaid parish church.

Fy “ The church called of St. Mary. not far from the same parish church.

“ The church which is named 7empull Benain, or the temple of St. Benignus.

7. ‘* The church called AMainistir Connachtach, that is, the Connaught Monastery,
in place, of which, being afterwards demolished, was built a chapel to St. Kieran..

. “ The church called Xi//-na-manach, that is, the church or cell of the monks,
which was dedicated to St. Cathradochus, or Caradoc, the monk, surnamed Gardh,
or the rough.

9. ‘The church Zempull Assurnuidhe (or, perhaps, Esserninus) ; and this
church is held in the greatest veneration among the islanders.

to. ‘* The church called Zempull an cheathruir aluinn, or the church of the
four beautiful (saints), who were SS. Fursey, Brendan of Birr, Conall, and Ber-
chann, whose bodies are also said to be buried in the same tomb, lying in the
cemetery of the same church.

11. “ The church called 7empull-mic-Duach, or the church of St. Mac Duagh,
(who is also called Colmanus, surnamed Mac Duagh), which is a handsome church
dedicated to that saint.

12, ‘‘ The handsome, and formerly parochial, church, called Zampull Breccain,
or the church of Brecan, in which also his feast is celebrated on the 22nd of May.

13. ‘‘ The church near the aforesaid church of St. Brecan, which is commonly
called Zempull a Phuill.”

Thus far of the churches and chapels of the first island. We read in our
Martyrologies that the natalis of St. Enda is celebrated of the 21st of March ;
that of St. Goban, on the 3oth of March and 3othof May; of St. Cronan, on
the 2nd of March ; St. Nehemias, on the 14th of June; and St. Benedict, on the
same 14th of June: ‘ wherefore,” adds Colgan, “I think that he is the same saint
who is called by the Calendar of Cashel Benedict, and by other Martyrologies
Nehemias.”

In the second island, according to the same list, there is one church called 7ém-
pull Ceannannach, dedicated to the same St. Ceannannach, and another church
dedicated to the Blessed Virgin, both subject to the parish of St. Enda.

