--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-214.png ---
188 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

1081. It was pillaged and destroyed by the Danes?
1110. Died Flann Hua Hoegha, comorb of St. Endeus.
1114. Died the comorb, Moel Columb Hua Cormacain.

P Annal. Munst.

rule of St. Enda, made Aran a burning light of sanctity for centuries in western
Europe. ‘The virginal saint from Aran Island,’ as Marianus O'Gorman styles
St. Enda, was to them a model of all the virtues of the religious life, but above
all he excelled in the exercise of penitential mortifications. St. Cuimin of
Connor tells us that —

‘Enda loved glorious mortification
In Aran—triumphant virtue !
A narrow dungeon of flinty stone,
To bring the people to heaven.’

*¢* Ayan,’ says Froude, ‘is no better than a wild rock. It is strewed over with
the ruins, which may still be seen, of the old hermitages; and at their best they
could have been but such places as sheep would huddle under in a storm, and
shiver in the cold and wet which would pierce through the chinks of the walls.
. » + « Yes; there on that wet soil, with that dripping roof above them, was
the chosen home of these poor men, Through winter frost, through rain and
storm, through summer sunshine, generation after generation o :them, there they
lived and prayed, and at last lay down and died.” These miracles of penance
were the first and immediate results of St. Enda’s work in Aran. We cannot,
indeed, describe the details of his daily life, for they have been hidden from
human view, as it is becoming that such secrets of the Heavenly King should be
hidden. But there yet survives the voice of one of those who lived with him in
Aran; and in the ideal of an abbot which St. Carthage sets before us, we un-
doubtedly find re-produced the traits which distinguished the abbot of Aranmore,
from whom St. Carthage first learned to serve God in the religious life. St. Enda
was his first model of the ‘patience, humility, prayer, fast, and cheerful abs-
tinence ; of the steadiness, modesty, calmness that are due from a leader of
religious men, whose office it iso teach in all truth, unity, forgiveness, purity,
rectitude in all that is moral ; whose chief works are the constant preaching of
the gospel for the instruction of all persons, and the sacrifice of the Body of the

eat Lord upon the holy altar.’ It was on Aranmore, and in St, Enda, that he

rst beheld at the altar of God that pattern priest after whose example he thus
warns all priests :—

* When you come into the Mass—
It is a noble office—
Let there be penitence of heart, shedding of tears,
And throwing up of hands.
There shall be no permanent love in thy heart,
But the love of God alone.
For pure is the body thou receivest.
Purely must thou go to receive it.’

“ The fame of St. Enda’s austere holiness, and of the angelical life which so
many were leading in Aran under his guidance, soon spread far and wide. The
sweet odour of Christ, diffused from the lonely island in the Atlantic, penetrated
to every part of Ireland. and wherever it reached, its gracious message stirred
with joy the hearts of the noblest and best among the servants of God. It told
them of a spot where men led a life of higher sanctity, and of more thorough
severance from fleshly ties than was known elsewhere ; and to souls hungering and
thirsting after perfection, to hear of the spiritual treasures stored up in Aran, was
to long for the wings of the dove to fly thither, to be made happy sharers in its

ces. Hence, soon, the Galway fishermen, whom St. Enda had blessed, found

y after day their corachs crowded with strangers—religious men, of meek eye

