--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-265.png ---
County of Kerry. 237

Innisfallen °° An island, containing twelve acres, on the -
Lake of Killarney.

* Called anciently Inisfaithienn.

The parish of Ventry, in Irish Fionn-traig, t.e., the white-strand, is so called.
from the situation of the old parish church on the margin of a beautiful strand,
remarkable for its fine white sand. At the east end of the strand, there are
remnants of several small cairns.

The parish of Kilquan. :.c., Cill-Cuain, is situate in the west of the barony.
The old church was 50 feet in length and 174 in breadth. The foundations and
a portion of the south wall remain. It is remembered that St. Cuan’s day was
formerly celebrated here as patron. There is also a well of St. Kieran two miles
to the west of the church.

In the parish of Kildrum is the townland of Kilfountain, known in Irish as Cil/-
Fionntain : there remain the foundations and some ruins of the old church of St.
Fintan.

In the parish of Ballanvoher (4.2. daile-an-bhothair, ‘‘the town of the road”) is
Teampall-na-hinse, é.¢., church of the island,” though Inch island, as it is called,
is rather an isthmus than an island. In the townland of Kilduff, is a burial-place
called Crlt-dubh, ‘* black church” or Cella nigra.

In the parish of Ballinacoorty, in the townland of same name, is Toberreen-
dony, #2, Zobar rigan Domhnaigh, and there is still a holy well there: also
another holy well called 7oternacrugha, i.¢., ‘‘ the well of the cross,” from a stone
cross which stands over the well.

In the parish of Dingle, townland of Ballvreagh, is an old small church or cell
called 7zampull-geal, i.¢., ‘* the white church,” from the whitish colour of its
stones ; but also. and more properly called 7eampull Manchain, from its patron,
St. Manchain. At the distance of 300 yards. is a well called Tubber-Manchain,
where stations are still performed. 300 yards from the cell to the west is a
grave 14 feet in length, and marked by a pillar stone, on which Oghams are
inscribed, and which is also marked with a cross. It is called the grave of St.
Manchain.

In the parish of Stradbally, and townland of Ardbeg, there is a holy well called
Tubber Muire, i.e, “the well of the Blessed Virgin Mary.” There is also the
parish of Killiney, in Irish A‘/-Einne, i.e.,* Church of St. Enda.” This is the
same saint who is honoured at Killeany, in Arrann, and in several other parts of
the south and west of Ireland. Another parish is called Kilgobbin, #.c., St. Gobban's
Church: and its townland of Killeordrann preserves the name of St Odran, or
Ottaran.

The parish of Marhin, in Irish Marthain, presents three hallowed memories—
the Cruach-Marthain, or “ hill of St. Martan ;” the holy we:l of St. Molagga ; and
“the Church of the Colmans.” The parish of Kinnard honours St. Fintan, also
written Fionan, as patron on 17th February : his holy well also marks the spot,
and near it there is another holy well called 7ober-Muire, or ‘‘ well of the Blessed
Virgin Mary.” It, too, honours the memory of St. Martin, at Zeampull-Martin,
where the ruins of the old church may still be seen.

® Inisfallen, also written Inisvalen, is situate in the centre of Lough Lane, or
Lower Lake of Killarney. It is famed for its scenery, and in an antiquarian point
of view is remarkable for the ruins of its abbey, and of a very ancient oratory
founded by, or dedicated to, St. Finan, surnamed Lobhar, #,¢., ‘‘the Leper.” The
memory of this patron was honoured at Inisfallen on the 16th of March. and all
our Martyrologies mark on that day the festival of St. Finian Lobhar. Thus, in
the Martyrology of Donegal on that day :—‘‘ Fionan, the Leper, of Swords and of
Cluanmore in Leinster, and of Ardfionain in Munster. He was of the race of Cian,
son of Oilioll Oluim.” The Calendar of Cashel has :—“ S. Finanus Lobhran, filius
Conalli, de Surdo, et de Cluainmor Maidoci in Lagenia, et de Inisfaithlin in lacu
Lenensi, et de Ardfinain.” The Filiré of St. dingus styles him—“ Praefulgidus
Finanus Lobhra,” and adds the note :— At Sord Choluim-Cille, and in Inis
Faithlend, on Loch Lein, and in Cluainmor Moidhoc, and in Ard-Finan in
Munster, he is honoured, And Mella, sister of Coemghen of Glendaloch, was the

