--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-196.png ---
170 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

at Ross-Oirthir, near Lough-Earn ; she died about the year
480; and her festival is observed here the Ist of January.”
Ross Orry is now a parish church in the diocese of Clogher.*

¥ Act. SS. p.3. ——* Lid, visit.

tember, 1609, Ballioconnell is retumed as a chapelry of the parish of Magherie-
coolemanny, having one tate of land, whereof O’Connelly is the herenagh, paying
yearly unto the Bishop of Clogher two shillings and eightpence per annum,

A.D. 1379 James O'Conolly, Prior of Devenish, and Flaherty O'Mongan,
Erenagh of Ossory, died.

A.D. 1411. Conor O’Casey, Erenagh of the lands of Muintir-Casey, in Devenish,
and Johannes Mac Sgoloige, Erenagh of his own lands at Ross-airthir, died.
O'Donovan writes that Mac Sgoloige signifies the son of the farmer, and very
common in Fermanagh, but anglicized Farmer.

A.D. 1423. Maurice, the son of Matthew, son of Osgar Maguire, Archdeacon of
Clogher, Parson of Achadh-Urchair [Aghalurcher], and rd of Claoin-inis
(Cleenish) and Ross-airthir, died on the sixth of the Calends of May.

A.D. 1434. Lucas O’Leannain, Prior of Lisgool, and Matthew O'Conghaile,
Erenagh of Rossory, died.

COUNTY OF GALWAY.

Abbey Gormogan ;\ In the barony of Longford, and situated
about nine miles east of Loughrea.

Monaster O’Gormogan, alias de Via Nova, was founded
for regular canons of St. Augustin, under the invocation of
the Virgin Mary, by O’Gormogan.,*

We find that Dermod O’Feigher was abbot here some time
before the year 1309, in which year William, son of William
Hacket, sued the abbot of this house for five acres of pasture
and forty acres of turbary in Corbellynenegall. Richard, son
of Gilbert de Valle, did also sue the prior for fifty-four acres
of land, with their appurtenances, in Fynounta, of which
Dermod O’Feigher, the former abbot, had unjustly disseized
Gilbert, his father.>

July 1st, 34th King Henry VIIL, this abbey was granted to
Ulick, the first Earl of Clanricarde.*

Abbey Knockmoy ** Is situated six miles south-east of

* War. Mon. » King, p. 141. * Lodge, vol. i., p. 60 * Or Knock-muighe,
.2., Hill of Victory.

1 This monastery was commonly called ‘‘de via nova.” In the Patent Rolls
of Henry VIII. there is entered on rst gy 1535, a grant to “ Willic Boruc,
otherwise MacWilliam,” of the style and dignity of Earl of Clanrickard and Baron
of Dunkellyn ; and further, a grant to him of ‘‘all that, the Monastery of Via Nova,
Clonfertensis Dioecesis, with all the lands, houses, &c., appurtenant thereto.”

® The Abbey of Knockmoy is situated six miles to the south-east of Tuam. The
name originally was written Cnoc-Muaide, i.e., “the hill of Muadh” a woman's
name, which, according to O’Clery’s and Cormac’s glossaries, means “the noble
or venerable.” The monastery was founded in 1189 by Cathal Croibdearg, in

