--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-247.png ---
as es

County of Galway. 221

John was abbot in the year 1289, when he was sued by
William, son of John de Burgh, and Mora, his wife (daughter
and heir to Odo M‘Lyn), for the townlands of Killyn,
Shagnessy, and Faghmoyle, in right of his said wife.*

This abbey is situated to the north-west of the cathedral,
on a neck of land between two loughs, which, according to
some authors, evacute themselves in summer into whirlpools ;
however, this rarely happens, as the water never goes off but
in a very dry season. .

The church, though small, is a very neat building; the
pillars and arches, from the entrance to the altar part, and
those of the east window, are finished in an elegant style, and
the angles at the east end are worked in pillars. To the
south of the Church is a sacristy, and adjoining to that a
room, where was probably deposited the valuable effects
belonging to the church, and which, being arched, they call
the jail; on the south of these is a chapel and the refectory ;
from the whole of this we may infer, that the canons of the
monastery dwelt in separate houses. To the north, about
two feet from the church, is an old wall; an ancient tradition
still exists at Kilmacduach, of its being once a place of
penance. There is also a holy well here with a circular
inclosure.* .

Here is an ancient round tower, which leans 17} feet
from its perpendicular. It may not be improper to remark,
that the tower at Pisa, so universally celebrated, leans but
13 feet.

At the general suppression, this monastery was granted to
Richard, Earl of Clanricarde.”

Kilrickill ; In the barony of Leitrim, near Loughteagh.

St. Patrick built Kilrichelle for his sister, St. Richellec

We know no more of it as a monastery; but Kilrickill is
now a parish church in the diocese of Clonfert.¢

Kiltullagh ; A cell of the third order of St. Francis was
built here some time before the year 1441.°

Kinalekin ; Commandery ; A commandery for Knights
Hospitallers was founded here in the 13th century, under the
invocation of St. John the Baptist,‘ by O'Flaherty ;§ Kina-
lekin is probably in Iar-Connaught, of which O'Flaherty was
dynast.

We find that John was prior in the year 1310; when Joan,
the widow of John de Burgh, sued him, as custos of his lands,
&c., for her dower thereout.®

John de Blohely was prior; he was succeeded by a third

* King, p.199. * Bp. Pococke, Harris's Tab. © Tr. Th. p.229. 4 Harris's
Tab. * War. Mon. * War. Mon. © Allemande. ” King, p. 66.

