--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-252.png ---
226 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

bishop, and a market and borough town, sending burgesses to
Parliament.

We are told that an abbey was founded here so
early as the year 487,” under the invocation of the Virgin
Mary.

St. Jarlath is said to have made it a cathedral in the begin-
ning of the sixth century ;* and it is also said that a city was
built here in honour of this exemplary bishop’ His remains
were preserved at Tuam, in a chapel called Temple-na-scrin,
t.e., the church of the shrine. After the death of this saint,
we meet with three persons who are expressly said to have
been abbots of Tuam, viz.: Cellach, son of Eochad, who died
in the year 808 ;* Nuadat Hua Bolchain, abbot and aachorite,
who died 3rd October, 877 ;* and Cornac, son of Kieran, abbot
of Tuam and prior of Clonfert, who died in 879.”

Priory of St. Fohn the Baptist; Was founded about the
year 1140, by Tirdelvac O'Connor, King of Ireland. We
cannot say to what order this house did belong,* but find
that it was granted to Richard, Earl of Clanrickard.—See
Aghrim.

Abbey of the Holy Trinity; Was founded by one of
the family of Burgh, either in the reign of King John
or in the beginning of King Henry IIL, for Premonstre
Canons.4

Tuam and all its churches were destroyed by fire A.D.
1244°

 Conry. * Calendar. Y Usher, p. * Act. SS. p. Id.
P- 373. a dd. yon 0 War. Mon a &% ° Annal. ‘hunse®

in his time. During the episcopate of Aed O’Hoisin, the cathedral was built
through the munificence of Turlogh O'Connor, Monarch of Ireland. “ Of the
ancient church of Tuam the chancel only remains; but, fortunately, this is
sufficient to make us acquainted with its general style of architecture, and to show
that it was not only a larger, but a more splendid structure than Cormac’s church
at Cashel, and not unworthy of the powerful monarch to whom it chiefly owed
its erection. The chancel is a square of 26 feet in external measurement,
and the walls are 4 feet in thickness. Its east end is pene by three cir-
cular-headed windows, each 5 feet in height and 18 inches in width externally,
but splaying on the inside to the width of 5 feet. . . . . But the great
feature of this chancel is its triumphal arch, now erroneously supposed to have
been a doorway, which is, perhaps, the most magnificent specimen of its kind
remaining in Ireland.”—Zhe Round Towers, page 217. The famous cross of
Tuam dates from tbe same period, and, as its inscriptions prove, was intended as
a memorial of Archbishop O’Hoisin and the Monarch Turlogh O'Connor.
Petrie says of it that “it may justly rank as the finest monument of its class and
age remaining in Ireland.”—J/éid. See also Christian Inscriptions in the Irish
Stokes, by Miss Stokes, vol. ii., page 75. As regards the priory of St. John the
Baptist, we learn from Lynch that it was held till the Reformation by the Canons
Regular of St. Augustine. The Abbey of the Holy Trinity is said by Le Page
to have been a foundation from Premonstre, in France. Miraeus, however, -
affirms that it was a branch from the Abbey of Steinfield, in Podolia, in the
Kingdom of Poland. 3

