--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-072.png ---
52 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

that this nunnery was built by St. Monenna about the year
630, after she had quitted Faugher, in the county of Louth.*

St. Conchenna, sister to St. Lugad of Clonfeacle, was abbess
of this nunnery ; she died A.D. 654.!

Kilsleve is now a parish church in the diocess of Armagh.®

Inquisition 4th November, 3rd King James, finds, that
Alicia Nigen M‘Donchey O’Hanlon was the last prioress, and
roth March, 34th King Henry VIII. she was seized of the
townlands and the tithes of Agheyelloge, alias Aghyloge,
Ballytolloche, Clonynlym, alias Clonelome, Ballylurgakeill,
Aghetidy and Aghedemoyll, alias Aghadavell ; also of the
tithes of the twelve townlands of Camlogh (Dromeherime and
Tollyvonney only excepted) ; also of the four townlands of
the Moyry, the four townlands of Faddum,; also the six
townlands of Cohill; the seven townlands of Killin; and the
townlands or places known by the name of Ballinageragh,
Ballinlat, Ballynedowlargoegh, Carrickbraddagh, Dromenty,
Teucrome, Carricksticken, Clogh O’Cominslawnohill, Corre-
gillereen, Moyfanner, Mauclawne, Latebrigett, Aghadonoman,
Ballekeill, Charchill, Leballimore, Corickegallyogh, the two
Sturgans, Lisliagh, Aghnuckshane, and Carigedilane. All
the said lands were in this county, and of the annual value
besides reprises, of 40s. Irish money.

Stradhailloyse. \Nadding says, that it is in the diocess of
Armagh, and that a monastery for conventual franciscans was
founded there, A.D., 1282, and that a provincial chapter of the
order was held therein in the year 1315.!

Tahellen® In Hy-meith-tire* St. Patrick founded Tegtalain,
and madeSt. Killian bishop of it;! his feast is held on May 27th."

This church was burnt A.D. 670."

“Usher. * Act. SS. p. 606, “Visitation Book. ‘Wading, quoted by Allemande.
* Now the barony of Orior, ' Tr. Th. p. 184. ™ Act. SS. p. 331. ® Tr. Th. 633.

* Teg-Talain, or Tigh-Talain, i.e. domus Talani, derives its name from S. Tel-
Janus, son of Tegan, son of Colgan, chief of that region, or from S, Tolanus, son of
Donnchadh. e

““Martyrology of Donegal” mentions, under the 27th May,
“ Cillin, Bishop of Tigh-Talain in Oirghialla,”

COUNTY OF CARLOW.

1 From the period of the Norman invasion to the days of Henry the Eighth, Car-
low was, in a military point of view, perhaps, the most important county in Ireland.
Through its rich valleys lay the main road which connected the English settlements
in Munster with the seat of the Government.in Dublin. The bridge at Leighlin,
in the centre of the county, was the only passage across the river Barrow, enabling
the Norman colony around the capital to communicate with the counties of Kil-

