--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-328.png ---
290 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

of May.* The founder died here the 17th of March, A.D. 493,
in his 120th year, and was interred with great solemnity at
Downpatrick.*

1011. Kennfailad of Saul, bishop, anachorite, and pilgrim,
died of the plague at Armagh." .

Malachy O’Morgair, whilst bishop of Down, rebuilt this
abbey with stone.” See under “ AMoville,” how this abbey
was treated by the abbot of Moville and the King of Ulidia.

1175. The son of the abbot of Moville was abbot of Saul,
and died in this year.* _P———,, the abbot, was a subscribing
witness to Sir John de Courcey’s charter to the- abbey of St.
Patrick in Downpatrick.

1273. ———Molys, prior of Bangor, was elected abbot;
but not having obtained the royal license, Galfrid de Stocks,
canon of Carleon, was appointed abbot by the bishop of Down,
with the consent of government.” :

* Usher, p. 453, and Tr. Th., p. 265. * Ann. Four Masters. © Tr. Th., p. 298.
~ War. Mon. * Ann. Annon. ¥ Prynne, vol. 3, p. 130.

Saul, and of two ruined castles and a garden within the said site, together with two
castles and three towns called ‘‘ Merrytowne and Ballysugah (Merrytown is an
attempted translation of the Irish name Ballysugah—sugach, merry), Ballymote,
Carrowvanny, Ballintlieve, Killyneeny, and 20s. per an. of head rent out of
Castlemoghan, Ballylenagh, and Carrintaggart.” Harris describes the state of the
castles of Saul in histime. A large portion of the castles of Saul was taken down
for the material at the erection of the Protestant church in 1770, and nearly all the
remains of the old church were removed at the same time. In the graveyard are
two ancient buildings, which are precisely in the same state as described by Harris
one hundred and thirty years ago :—‘‘ There are here two small vaulted rooms of
stone yet entire, about seven feet high, six feet long, and two feet and a half broad,
with a small window placed in one side. Perhaps these small chambers were
confessionals, or places of private devotion. One of them is now closed up and
used by some families for a tomb. the churchyard being a great burial place for the
natives.” These little vaults very much resemble the saints’ tombs at Bannagher,
Boveragh, and Tamlaghtard, in the diocese of Derry. Father MacCana describes
one of them as ‘‘a diminutive little chapel, in which St. Patrick is reported to
have passed the night in watching and prayer.”

Last year acemetery, which evidently was a portion of the ancient cemetery,
was discovered under the avenue, immediately outside the churchyard. The graves
were lined and covered with thin flag-stones, and each grave contained a number -
of small sea pebbles—round and white—which may have been used for beads (see
anote in Butler’s ‘‘ Lives of the Saints,” at Rosary Sunday) ; similar pebbles
have been found in other ancient graves in Derry, in the Ards, and in an ancient
cemetery in the townland of Ballynacraig, in the parish of Inch (see, “Sculptured
Stones of Scotland,” vol. ii.)

The seal of the abbey of Saul is attached to a petition preserved in the Chapter
House, Westminster. On the seal is inscribed ‘““S. commune capituli Sancti
Patricii de Saballo." The abbot, vested as a priest, sits in a rich chair, holding a
cross in his left hand, and raises his right hand, as in the act of giving benediction.
The lower compartment of the seal exhibits a bishop—probably St. Patrick—
holding a crozier.

A brass seal, which was found in the yard of the cathedral, Downpatrick, is pre-
served in the Belfast Museum. The inscription on it is “S. Fratris Johanis,
Abbatis de Saballo.” The abbot is represented fully vested asa priest ; he holds a
book in his left hand and a crozier in his right. The seal seems to belong to
the fifteenth century. -

