--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-103.png ---
County of Clare. 83

Kilarragh ;* there was an hospital or monastery here, of
which we have no further account, than that it was endowed

still remembered with veneration in and around Ennistymon. There are, however,
substantial proofs to show that St. Luchtigern was (as abbot or otherwise) con-
nected not only with Ennistymon and Corcomroe, but in an especial manner with
all Thomond or North Munster, and to justify us in assuming that as his principal
church was at 7uam Fionnlocha (now Tomfinnlough church in the present barony
of Upper Bunratty in the county of Clare), he resigned the apostleship of Ennis-
tymon to his contemporary St. Mainchin, the disciple and bosom friend of S¢.
MacCreiche of Corcomroe, who is still venerated as patron saint of the parish of
Cill Mainchinne or Kilmanaheen, in and near to which the town of Ennistymon
is situated.

The feast of St. Luchtigern is commemorated in the martyrology of Donegal
at 29th April, where, on the authority of the twelfth chapter of the Life of St.
MacCreiche of Corcomroe, he is made abbot of Zuaim-Fionnlocha in Tradraighe.

From this ancient life we learn that St. AfacCreiche belonged, by birth and
family, to the territory of Corcomroe, that he was the contemporary and bosom
friend of St. Ailbhe of Jmlinch Fubhair (now Emly in the county of Tipperary),
whose‘death is recorded in the ‘‘Annals of the Four Masters,” at the year 541, and
that St. Luchtigern was at this time connected with Ennistymon and Corcomroe.

The twelfth chapter of this life, where S¢. Luchtigern is mentioned gives a curious
and interesting account of a predatory excursion made into Corcomroe by the high
king of Connaught, namely, Aedh, son of Eochaidh (probably Aedh, son of Eochaidh
Tirmcharna, whose death is recorded by the “ Four Masters,” at the year A.D. 574).
in which he is said to have plundered the people of Corcomroe of all their cattle
and other moveable property. The people of Corcomroe thus oppressed, sent
messengers to request their kinsman S¢. AacCreiche, who was then staying with his
master, St. Aslbhe at Imliuch Fubhair (Emly in Tipperary), to come to their relief.
The messengers having reached Jm/iuch Fubhair related their unhappy tale to Sf.
MacCreiche, and besought St. Ailbhe to advise him to go with them toa place
called Carn Mic Tail (in Corcomroe) to meet the men of Corcomroe who were to
assemble there. .S¢. Ai/bhe consented, and AfacCreiche came with them, accom-
panied by his faithful disciple S¢. Afanchin, and made his way direct from Jmliuch
Jubhair (in Tipperary) to St. Luchtigern, to Innis Toma Fionntocha (i.e. the
Island of the Tumulus of the bright lake, now Zom/innlough, in the barony of
Upper Bunratty in the county of Clare, about two miles north-west of the village
of Six-mile-Bridge, where the ruin of St. Luchtigern’s old church may be still seen
near the bright lake, /inz/ough, which gives name to the townland of Finnlough,
and to the parish of Zom/innlough, in which it is situated), and here, we are told, he
remained from Saturday evening till the following Tuesday with St. Luchtigern.
MacCreiche related the object of his mission to S¢. Luchtigern, saying to him: ‘* You
(Luchtigern) ought to come with me to the relief of the men of Corcomroe, for it is
not more incumbent on me to do good to them than it is upon you.” ‘‘ True indeed
(said S¢. Luchtigern), and I shall go.” After awhile they set out from 7uaimfionn-
locha, namely, St. MacCreiche and his disciple St. Afainchin, accompanied by St.
Luchtis and one disciple (whose name is not given) and came direct to Carn-
Mic Tail, in Corcomroe, where they found the states and tribes of Corcomroe,
assembled to receive them.

After some deliberation, and having made all due preparation for the expedition,
the men of Corcomroe. led by St. MacCreiche and St. Mainchin, and accompanied
by St. Luchtigern and his disciple, went forth to demand the surrender of the spoils
of Corcomroe, and coming to where the plunder was all collected, we are told that

16 The church or cell of Cill Carthach gives name to the townland of Kilcar-
ragh, west of the ancient episcopal town of Kilfenora, in which it was situated.
It stood a few yards west of the old Cathedral Church of Kilfenora, to which it is
supposed to have been a cell or hospital. No trace now remains of the church
but a few stones to indicate the site, which is pointed out on the Ordnance Map of
Clare, sheet 16. See Kilfenora.

