--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-243.png ---
County of Donegall. : 211

died the 9th of June, A.D. 596 :* St. Adamnan, abbot of Hy,
and patron and restorer of this monastery, died the 23d of
September, A.D. 703,! about which time Raphoe became and
continues to be the seat of a bishop.

Rathcunga; in the barony of Tyrhugh. St Patrick
founded an abbey here, in which St. Assicus and five other
bishops were interred.*

= Tr. Th., p. 494. ‘TId., p. 509. *Id., p. 176.

to give its name to the diocese, and to hold the episcopal residence, has declined
into a dilapidated village, and the bishop of the diocese now resides in Letter-
kenny. The patron and first bishop of Raphoe is commonly set down as St. Eunan,
but éru/y and correctly. St. Adamnan, for Eunan or Aoonan is the Irish pronunci-
ation of Adamnan. The late Rev. Mr. Kelly, professor in Maynooth College, in
his ‘' Notices of the Patron Saints of Ireland,” calls attention to this fact. Writing
of the patron saint of Raphoe, he says :—‘‘ His festival was formerly observed in
that diocese on the 7th of September. It is now on the 23rd of that month. the
day on which all the ancient calendars commemorate the illustrious abbot of Hy.
St. Adamnan, é.c., WSd€mndn, correctly pronounced Eunan.” Colgan, in his Acta
Sanctorum, nowhere insinuates the existence of a St. Eunan as distinct from St.
Adamnan, but invariably writes of Adamnan as bishop of Raphoe. From all
this, however, we are not warranted in concluding that this Adamnan, first bishop
of Raphoe, is the same as the illustrious abbot of Hy, who was abbot also of the
monastery at Raphoe, and enlarged it. Ware was the first to write Eunan; he
was unacquainted with the native pronunciation, and hearing the people sayi
Aoonan, he concluded it must be Eunan. This mistake of his caused serious ae
ficulty and much anxious research to scholars who followed him in Irish antiquities.
Harris, for instance, in his work, says :—‘‘ It seems it was St. Eunan, who erected
the church of this abbey into a cathedral, and who is looked upon to be the first
bishop of this see. But, upon the strictest inquiry I could make, I have not been
able to discover the exact time in which he lived.”

St. Adamnan, who enlarged and governed the monastery of Raphoe, has left
us the most perfect biography extant of St. Columbkille. He was himself a saint,
and one of the most remarkable men of his time. Springing from the stock of
the renowned Conall-Gubben, he seems to have devoted himself from his earliest
years tothe service of God, in the order of his more renowned kinsman St.
Columbkille. In due time he was elected to the abbacy of Hy, being the ninth in
order from the holy founder. His talents and accomplishments, as wellas his extraor-
dinary sanctity, made themselves known under the rude garb of the monk, and king
and legislators often invoked his assistance in matters of difficulty. He seems to have
lived much in Ireland. He was the intimate friend of the famous Alfrid of North
Britain. Ata legislative assembly at Tara, in the year 697, he procured the

assing of the law of the innocents. viz., a law protecting women and children
rom the barbarities of war—a law afterwards known as the Canon of Adamnan, a
memorial which a conqueror might envy. The venerable Bede bears testimony,
and a more competent witness there could not be, that he was ‘‘a good man, and
wise, and a peer in the knowledge of the Scriptures.”

The following entries in the ‘‘ Annals” will show the immense historic interest
and importance which surround the ecclesiastical centre of the venerable diocese
of Raphoe :—‘ A.D. 813. Maelduin, son of Ceamiaoladh, Bishop of Rathboth,
died. A.D. 925. St. Maelbrighda, son of Tornan, successor of Patrick, Colum-
Cill6 and Adamnan, head of the piety of all Ireland, and of the greater part of all
Europe, died at a good old age. A.D. 952. Robhartach, successor of Colum-
Cillé, and Adamnan, died. A.D 1016. Muireadhach, son of Crichan, successor
of Colum-Cille and Adamnan, a learned man, bishop and virgin, lector of Ard-
macha, and intended successor of St. Patrick, died, after the 74th year of his age,
on the fifth of the calends of January, on Saturday night precisely ; and he was
buried with great honouy and veneration in the great church of Ardmacha before
the altar. A.D, 1057. Robhartaich. son of Feardomhnach, successor of Colum

