--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-312.png ---
276 Ancient Monasterics of Ireland.

here by St. Patrick for St. Thassac,! whose festival is observed
on the 14th of April Kilcholpa is now unknown.
* Tr. Th. p. 270. © O'Flaherty Ms.

feet 6 inches high, and 10 inches wide, splayed inside to the width of 3 feet 2
inches, and ends not in an arch but in a large flag. In building the walls yellow
clay has been used instead of mortar. The plot of ground which the ruins and
cemetery occupy is about half a rood in extent, and seems from its elevation above
the surrounding field to have been a rath.” Inthe field to the north-east of the
ruin there was formerly a well, which was probably the holy well. This was the
ancient church of Rath-Colpa, over which presided St. Tassach, the bishop who
administered Communion to St. Patrick when that saint was dying at the neighbour-
ing church of Saul. The ancient hymn written by St. Fiech, Bishop of Sletty,
a disciple of St. Patrick, says :—
“Tassach remained after him

When he administered the Communion to him:

He said that he would give Communion to Patrick,

Nor was the prophecy of Tassach false.”

The great hagiologist, St. Aengus, treating of the 14th of April, the festival of
St. Tassach, thus commemorates this honour :—
“The Royal Bishop Tassach
Who gave, on his arrival,
The body of Christ. the King truly powerful,
As Communion to Patrick.”

Upon which an interlinear gloss observes his church was at Raholp, saying—
“*g.e, at Rathcolp in Lecale of Ulidia: é«., an artificer and bishop to Patrick was
Tassach, and this is the festival of his death.” St. Tassach is enumerated ina very
ancient poem as one of “the three artificers of great endowment,” who were attached
to ‘* the family of Patrick of the prayers.” The glorious privilege of having given
the Viaticum to our national apostle forms the distinguishing trait in the notice of
St. Tassach in the ‘‘ Martyrology of Donegal.” That * Martyrology,” on the 14th
of April, says :—“ Tassach, Bishop of Raholp, in Ulidia, é, Lecale. This is the
Tassach who gave the body of Christ to St. Patrick before his death in the Monas-
tery of Saul.” St. Tassach seems to have been the only Bishop of the Church of
Raholp, at least our early annals do not record any succession, but the lands of the
ancient church merged into the see lands of the divcese, and in the time of John
de Courcy Bishop Malachy gave, among other properties, ‘‘ Rathoop” (Raholp)
to the Church of St, Patrick in Down. Shortly afterwards Hugh de Lacy con-
firmed those possessions, including “ Rathcolp,” to the bishop as Abbot of St.
Patrick’s, An ancient document which pretends to have been drawn up in 1210,
and which professes to give an account of the possessions of the See of Down,
says, ‘Item in Rathcalpa—three carucates in temporalities and a chapel in spiritu-
alities, which were given by the same Flathri.” In the taxation of Pope Nicholas
the church of Rathcolpe was valued at 4 marks. The account of the receipts of
the see lands during the interval between March qth, 1305, and July tst of the same
year, returned into the Exchequer by Walter de la Hay, says—‘‘ And of 4 pounds
and 20 pence of the property of lordships of the prises, services, perquisites of the
court of Rathcolppe. for the said term during the same period.” Of the profits of
the mills and of the labour of the tenants in that place he makes no return. ‘‘ be-
cause all the labour is done in autumn, and the rent of the mill for the first term
is paid at the Purification of the Blessed Virgin, and for the second term at the
festival of St. Peter ad Vincula.” The water-mill of Raholp occupies the site. no
doubt of the bishop’s mill ; and the ‘‘Terrier” returns, in 1615, ‘‘ The mensal of
Rathalpe—the curate pays proxies 1s., refections 1s., synodals 2s." The same
document returned—“ In Ratalp 2 plowlands, spiritualities, and temporalities ” as
the property of the bishop, and to this day two townlands of Raholp are held
under the see. In 1622 ‘Capella de Ruchalpe” is returned by the Protestant
bishop as “ruynous.” ‘The great tithes possessed by Tho. Barnwell, and the
small. esteemed to be worth the third part thereof, some 20s. per ann. Noe curate
nor able to maynteyne any, fit to be united to the next, which is Soule.” The
glories of Raholp had passed away !

ee

