--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-311.png ---
County of Down. 275

1380. It was enacted by parliament, that no mere Irishman
should be permitted to profess himself here.*

This abbey, with half a carucate, called the Island of Inch,
also a certain water, called the Narrow Water; a carucate or
ballyboe in Ballirenald, and a ballyboe in Faghebrogye; a
ballyboe in Ballymugnegall, and half a ballyboe in Jermyn ;
a quarter of a carucate in Erery; a carucate in Ballyeany; a
ballyboe in St. John’s ; two acres in Ballavig and Ballygilbert,
and two carucates in the two Granges there, were granted to
Gerald Earl of Kildare. See Lismullen in county of Meath.

The church of the abbey was built in the form of a cross ;
part of it yet remains ; at the east end are three large windows
with Gothic arches, upwards of twenty feet high ; in the north
and south walls are two windows, each of two arches, and
little inferior to those at the east end.4 On the south side of
the altar of this noble building, are still to be .scen the tops of
the seats for the administering priest and his assistants, cut in
the wall and beautified with Gothic sculpture; on the south
side was the steeple, supported by an elegant arch, some of
the beads or strings of which are yet visible.*

Kulcholpa ;* near Downpatrick; an abbey was founded

° King, p. 93. 4 Hist. County of Deaon, p.37- ° Bp. Pococke.

“For they heretically maintain, not their laymen. and seculars merely, but even
some of their ecclesiastics, that it is no greater sin to kill an Irishman than a dog,
or any other brute beast. And to carry out this monstrous assertion, some of
their monks coolly declare, that if it should be their lot, as it does often happen, to
kill an Irishman, they would not on this account refrain from the celebration of
Mass, even for a single day. And thus the monks of Granard, in the diocese of
Ardagh, as also the monks of Inch, belonging to the same order, in the diocese
of Down, unhesitatingly put into shameless practice what they profess in words ;
for in the open day they attack the Irish in armed bodies, and massacre them,
and notwithstanding celebrate their Masses.” —(Fordun Scotichron, lib. xii..cap. 30.)
Jocelin, the biographer of St. Patrick, was a monk of Furness, and it is pro-
bable that he was one of the monks brought over to Inch, where he could have
easily obtained the information necessary for his undertaking, which he completed
about the year 1183.
In the taxation of Pope Nicholas, the temporalities of the abbot of Inch were
valued at £10 19s. 4d.
Ballirenald, is now Ballyrenan,

Faghebrogie, is now mera Townlands in the parish of Inch.

Ballymugnagall, is now Ballygally,

Jermyn, is intended for Turmenan,

Erery, is intended for Erenagh, in the parish of Bright.

Ballyeany is intended for Ballycam, in the parish of I’right.

St. Joh intended for St. John’s Point, in the parish of Rathmullan.
Baliavig, is intended for Ballyviggis, in the parish of Bright.
Ballygilbert, is now Ballygilbert, in the parish of Bright.

The Two Granges, now Woodgrange, in the parish of Down.

8 Kilcholpa, now Raholp, near Saul.—In a sub-denomination of the townland
of Raholp called Banaghan or Banagh, -are the ruins of the ancient church of
of Ratholp, locally called Church-Moyley. The church was 33 feet 4 inches in
length and 21 feet 4 inches in width. Dr. Reeves says :—‘‘ The south wall is
overturned ; the east and west walls are about 12 feet high; the east window is 4


