--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-115.png ---
County of Clare. 95

but the fate he merited soon overtook him, for he fell by the
troops of Thomond.*

1164. This abbey was put into the same miserable state
this year.!

1170. It was plundered again about this time.«

Tomgrany is now a parish church.

» Jd. and O'Halloran, vol. 2, p. 294. ' Act. SS. p. 634. * Id.

access in Dublin. This passage is of great value, and cannot be a fabrication
of Colgan, though it is probable that he has quoted the wrong Annals,* It runs

thus :—

“A.D. 964, Cormac O’Killeen, Coarb of the Saints Kiaran, Coeman, and Cro-
nan, bishop sage, a man of great age, who erected the church of Zuaim Greine,
together with its tower, died.

*«It is to be lamented that we have not the original Irish of this passage, as it
would show that a Cloig Teach (round tower) was erected at Tuaim Greine, in the
third quarter of the tenth century. This passage must be looked for in the more
ancient original Annals.

“Tt will further appear from a passage given by Keatinge in the reign of Brian
Boromh, that the fower of Tuaim Greine was not built for the first time in the Abbacy
of Cormac O’Killeen, but redui/t or repaired, as can be inferred from the words
employed, Cloigtheach Thuama Greine do athnuadhadh le Brian, i.e. ‘The round
tower of Zuaim Greine was renewed by Brian.’ This passage can be easily reconciled
with the one published by Colgan, for the fact was that Saint Cronan’s little tower,
which had been shattered by lightning at various periods, and patched up as often,
was no longer large or strong enough to answer the purposes of the monastery,
which had in the course of three or four centuries sprung up at 7uaim Greine, and
Brian thought proper to extend his patronage to the aged abbot to have it rebuilt.
The antiquary Bos to lament that even the site of this tower is not now known at
Tuaim Greine.

“The present church of Zuaim Greine is of no antiquity, and there is nothing there
by which the antiquarian can be interested but a rude castle, which was built by
the O’Grady's, hereditary Aerenachs of Tuaim Greine, and lords of the territory of
Hy Donghaile, in which it is situated. This castle is mentioned in the College list
of the castles of Thomond, as belonging to Edmond O’Grady, who had another
castle at Moyno, and another at Scariffe.

“ The little town of Scariffe, which is shewn on the Down survey as a village even
then of some importance, belongs to this parish. It is mentioned in the “ Annals of
the Four Masters” at the year A.D. 1598, as a castle taken from the Attorney of
the Bishop of Meath’s son (Brady) by Taidg O’Brien. _It is also mentioned in the
same Annals at the year 1564. The holy well of Saint Cronan, the patron of
Tuaim Greine, is situated in the centre of the townland of Currakyle.—Your obe-
dient servant,

Joun O'Donovan.”

® The Irish text of this passage is found in the “ Chronicum Scotorum.” The
translation is as follows :—

“ A.D. 964, Cormac Ua Cillin, of the Uib Fiachrach Aidhne, Comarb of Ciaran
and of Coman, and Comarb of Tuaim Grene; and it was by him the great church
of Tuaim Grene was built and its C/oightech (round tower). Sapiens et senex, et
Episcopus, quievit in Christo.

Sce also Petrie’s “ Round Towers,” p. 375.

