--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-138.png ---
112 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

year 600, and built an abbey, which, after him, was called
the abbey of St. Barr, or Finbar ;> this foundation is by some
placed A.D. 606.° This abbey was founded near Lougheirc,

> Usher. Act. SS. p. 750. War. mon. ¢Conrys MS.

King who is now calling me to Himself.’ And then Barra was confessed, and
received the Holy Sacrament from the hand of Fiana, and his soul went to heaven,
at the cross which is in the middle of the Church of Cloyne; and there came
bishops, priests, monks, and disciples, on his death being reported, to honour him.
And they took him to Cork, the place of his resurrection, honouring him with
psalms and hymns and spiritual songs; and the angels bore his soul with joy un-
speakable to heaven, to the company of the patriarchs, prophets, apostles, and
disciples of Jesus Christ, and of the Holy Trinity, the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.”

We will not attempt to give in detail any sketch of the life of this great saint.
A few facts will suffice for our present purpose :—‘‘This most holy and elect of
God, and most worthy priest, Barr (it is thus his ancient Latin life begins), was born
of the sept called /éruin-Ratha, of Connaught, whose territory in after times
became the Diocese of Enaghdune.” He had for his master a religious named
Corporius, styled in our Irish calendars Mac-Cuirp, who himself had trained
to piety in Rome, in the monastery of St. Gregory the Great. St. Finbarr was
remarkable for miracles from his infancy ; and it is recorded in his life that, in
company with SS. Colgu, Maedhoc, and David, and twelve religious of his own
monastery, he made a pilgrimage to Rome. St. Gregory the Great predicted his
promotion to the episcopate, which was fulfilled on his return to Ireland ; and at
the same filme a fountain of oil, symbolical of the abundance of graces with which
his ministry should enrich our Church, sprung forth in that spot, ‘‘ close to the altar,
where a cross was in after times erected, and where the saint’s remains were also
for a time deposited.” (Lynch's MS. Hist.)

Having governed his monastery and see for seventeen years, St. Finbarr was
summoned to his heavenly reward, and the 25th of September is marked in all the
ancient calendars for his festival. It was at the monastery of Cloyne, fifteen miles
from Cork, that St. Finbarr rested in peace ; but his remains were translated to his
own great monastery, and being deposited for a while beneath the monumental
cross at his cathedral church, they were subsequently encased in a silver shrine, and
exposed to the veneration of the faithful. They were thus preserved till the year
1089, when, as the Annals of Innisfallen relate, ‘‘ A fleet, with Dermot O’Brien,
devastated Cork, and carried away the relics of Barre from Cill-na-Clerich.”

St. Nessan, the immediate successor of St. Finbarr, was also renowned for his
sanctity : he died in the year 551. So numerous were the holy men who flourished
here, or wished their remains to be interred in the great Sanctuary of Lough-Eirce,
that St. Aingus, about the year 800, writes :—‘‘ Seventeen holy bishops, and seven
hundred favoured servants of God, who rest in Cork with Barri and Nessan, whose
names ate written in the heavens—all these I invoke unto my aid, through Jesus
Christ.” And again, he invokes all the saints who, by their prayers and peniten-
tial deeds, had sanctified that district :—‘‘ Three hundred and fifty holy bishops,
three hundred and fifty priests, three hundred and fifty deacons, three hundred and
fifty exorcists, three hundred and fifty lectors, three hundred and fifty ostiarii, and
all the saints, with the blessing of God, in Loch Eirchi, in the territory of Mus-
craighe and Hy-Eachach Cruadha, as is said:

‘The protection of Loch Irchi,
. In which is a sweet-toned bell :
Numerous as leaves upon trees,
Are the saints who around it dwell.’

“All these I invoke to my aid, through Jesus Christ."—(/rish Ecclesiastical
Record, vol. iii., p. 391.)

Among the sacred treasures of Cork was preserved a copy of the Gospels, tran-
scribed by St. Finbarr, and encased in a precious shrine :—‘‘ Evangelium sacris
Sancti Barrii digitis exscriptum librum gemmis auroque ornatum.”—(Lyach’s MS.)

