--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-231.png ---
County of Donegall. 199

Killibeggs ;© A sea-port and borough town, sending burgesses
to parliament, in the barony of Boylagh and Bannagh
A small house was built here for friars of the third order
of St. Francis* by M‘Swiny-bannig.4
° War. Mon. * Allemande.

implored him to return to his deserted see and monastery, but he refused sternly,
because he considered himself guilty of a great scandal in telling a falsehood,
and that he therefore ought not be seen where he had given the scandal. They
prevailed however on him to remove to another solitary place, where he shortly
after slept in the Lord, and was buried by his disciples in the country of Serthe,
at a place called Rathcunga.” Not far from this hermitage on the mountain,
there is, in the townland of Rinnakill, another holy well, which is called the
“Well of the Female Saints.” Local tradition says that a convent of nuns stood
here at an early period, but not a trace of it can now be seen.

18 Killibeggs.—The Four Masters make the following entry of Killybegs under the
year 1513 :—‘* Owen O’Malley came by night with the crews of three ships into
the harbour of Killybegs, and the chieftains of the country being all at that time
in O’Donnell’s army, they plundered and burned the town, and took many
prisoners in it. They were overtaken by a storm. so that they were compelled to
remain on the coast of the country, and they lighted fires and torches close to
their ships. A youthful stripling of the MacSweeny’s, 4.¢., Brian, and the sons
of Brien, and a party of shepherds overtook them and attacked them courage-
ously, and slew Owen O’Malley and five or six score along with him, and
also captured two of their ships, and rescued from them the prisoners they
had taken, through the miracles of God and St. Catherine whose town they
had profaned.” “Fere we have recorded the fact that Killy! was at all times
under the special patronage of St. Catherine. Hence we find MacSwiney of Ba-
nagh placing under her protection a Franciscan friary which he built near the town,
on the western shore of the bay; and when, in darker days, this monastery had been
wrecked and its inmates banished, the people raised upon its ruins a beautiful pa-
rochial church, and called it St. Catherine’s, which, tradition says, stood there
down to a comparatively late date. The old friary and church are now a heap of
grass-grown remains. The green fields belonging to the monastery are converted
into a glebe ; a neat parsonage has succeeded to the abbey, and St. Catherine,
banished from her old abode, at present presides over Killybegs from an
abrupt and craggy height above the town. Here the faithful have raised a
splendid church, with a handsome tower, which casts its shadow on the placid
waters of the loveliest little harbour to be found on the coast of Ireland. The
parish priest of Killybegs, or Killaghtee, in the last half of the sixteenth century,
was the illustrious Donatus MacCongail or Macmonigle, who was also Bishop of
Raphoe, and in that capacity assisted at the closing sessions of the Council of
Trent. While pastor of Killaghtee he seems to have been regarded as one of the
most learned and zealous of the Irish clergy, for Father David Wolf, S.J., who was
sent in those difficult times as Delegate Apostolic into Ireland, selected him as his
companion and adviser in the discharge of his onerous duties, and in the year 1561
deputed him on a special mission to-Rome, with important letters on the work in
which they were engaged. These letters are given by Dr. Moran in his Introduc-
tion to the Lives of the Archbishops of Dublin, and furnish a truthful picture of
the state of the Irish Church at that time. I will give a few extracts from them to
show how high Dr. MacConghail stood in the opinion of the Apostolic Delegate.
The letters are addressed to the Cardinal Protector of Ireland, and in one of them
Wolf thus speaks of MacConghail :—‘“‘I addressed a letter a few days ago, through
Sir William Neon to your excellency, on the state of the church in this district of
Munster; but now I deem it better to send in person the bearer of this letter,
Donald MacConghail, to give full details to you, as he was the companion of my
journey through Ireland, and as he is a man of judgment, well acquainted with the
circumstances of this country, having also, as I will just now mention, some other
particular business there. . . . , The bearer of this letter, Donald MacCon-
ghail, was my companion in the district of Connaught, and there is no one in Ireland

