--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-158.png ---
132 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

containing three acres, with the appurtenances, and a parcel
of land of the following denominations: Garricula, Ardeval-
legge, Aghavanister, Kilcroige, Coulevalinter, Venosige, Kil-
valinter, Venosige, Forraghmore, Downbahenie, Kilcoman,
lying south of the Blackwater, Ballymabene, Granesheagh,
Ballinegehie, Corrowharden, Carrigincroughere, and Glasi-

lascaib Molaga, and its breadth is from Glaise Muilim Mairteil to Beam Mic
Imhair, O’Lannain is chief of this Tuath ; Hi Cineadha, and Hi Seansain, and Hi
Dungasa, and Hi Dungaile are its patronymics, and Cill Maincheas is their burial
place.

“The border land of one half [side] of that country is Rossach na Righ and
Cathair-Gobhunn, and Cluas Droighe, and the Carcuir, and the burial place of
this Tuath is Cill Colmain Grec, and its proper name is Hi Rossa, and its length is
from the summit of Sliabh Cain to Abha Beag et reliqua.”

Ath Ubhla, now Appleford, in Fermoy. A passage in the Irish Life of Saint
Carthach, or Mochuda, of Raheen, Bishop of Lismore, gives the following
account of this and other places in the county of Cork :—‘‘ Another time Mochuda
went from Rahin into the province of Munster, and he came into Ciaraighe
Cuirche (now Kerrycurrihy, in the county of Cork), and he met Carbry Crimthan,
King of Munster, who happened at that time to be at Moy-Cuirche. At this
time there came a fiery thunderbolt, which demolished one of the king’s castles,
and killed his queen and his son Aedan, and a number of his people, and the
king’s two favourite chariot horses were also killed by the fall of the castle. The
king at once requested Mochuda to resuscitate his queen and his son, and when
Mochuda saw the firmness of the king’s faith, he made prayers for them, and bade
them arise and they arose, and Mochuda restored them in perfect health to the
king, and the king gave him extensive lands and many servitors. Another time
Cathal MacAedan, king of Munster, was in the land of Cuircne afflicted with
various diseases, being deaf, dumb, and blind ; Mochuda came to where the king
was, and the king and his friends implored Mochuda to relieve his distress.
Mochuda made prayers to God for him, and put the sign of the holy cross on his
eyes and ears, and mouth, and he was cured of all his diseases and troubles, and
the king Cathal gave extensive lands to God and to Mochuda for ever, namely,
Cathal Island, and Ross Beg and Ross More, and Pick-Island (now Spike
Island), and Mochuda sent holy brethren to build a church in Ross Beg, in
honour of God, and Mochuda himself commenced building a monastery in Pick
Island, and he remained there a full year.

“* Mochuda then placed three of the disciples above mentioned, namely, the
three sons of Nascann, #.¢,, Bishop Gaban, and Sraphan the priest, and Laisren
the saint, in those churches. And it was the holy bishop of Ardomain that gave
holy orders to these three in Mochuda’s presence, and it was he that was appointed
to preserve them in the path of righteousness, and he left two score more of his
brethren in his own stead in the monastery of Pick Island. Pick Island is a most
holy place, and most pious people reside in it perpetually.

“ And Mochuda then returned towards Rahin, and on his way eastward through
Munster he passed over a river which was called Neim at that time, but which is
called Avanmore to-day, and he saw a large apple in the middle of the ford, over
which he was passing, and he took it up and carried it in his hand, and hence
Ath Ubhla (now Appleford), in Fermoy, has its name. And the servant asked
for the apple from Mochuda. and he did not give it but said :—God will work a
miracle with this apple through me this day. for we shall meet the daughter of
Cuana Mac Cailchin, with her right arm powerless and motionless, hanging by
her side, and she shall be cured through this apple and through the power of
God: And this was verified; for Mochuda saw the virgin. with her maiden com-
panions, who were at their sports and amusements on the green of the court, and
going up towards her he said:—‘ Take this apple to thyself, my daughter.’
She stretched forth her left hand for the apple as was her wont ; Mochuda
said :—‘Thou shalt not get it in that hand, but reach out the other hand for it

