--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-187.png ---
County of Derry. 161

This is now a parish church in the diocess of Derry.™

Badoney ,* St. Patrick founded the church of Both-dhomnaigh
(which still retains its ancient name) in the valley of Glann-
aicle, near the river Fochmuine® in Oireacht-Ychathan, and
two miles from Derry ; and St. Atgenius, cook to the Saint,
was a presbyter here.°

In the diocess of Derry are two parish churches, called the
Upper and Lower Badoney ;? the one here mentioned must
be of the Lower Badoney

Boith-Medhbha ,° A monastery of this name was founded by
St. Columb, in Kiennacta (the barony of Kenoght) in the
diocess of Derry ; St. Aidan, nephew to St. Patrick, by Sinecha
his sister, was abbot of it.4

Camus ,;* on the river Bann, in the barony of Coleraine.

™ Visitation Book. ° Now called the Faughan-water. ° Tr. Th., p. 181. ? Visi-
tation Book. % Tr. Th., p. 495.

“a church,” or ‘‘ monastery.” The present Arragell was originally known a’
Aireacal Adamnaim, St. Adamnan being the patron of that church. The ancient
burial-place and site of the church are in the townland of Ballintemple, and a little to
the south there is another spot which bears the name of the same saint: it is marked
on the Ordnance map as ‘St. Onan’s rock.”

2In the Tripartite life of St. Patrick, it is recorded that he founded seven
churches along the course of the river Faughan. One of these was Both-domnaigh,
and it is the only one of these seven churches which still retains its name. St.
Aithcen, seventh in descent from Colla Meann, was the patron saint of Badoney.
The parish of Upper Badoney, which retains the site of the ancient church and ceme-
tery, and coincides with the valley of Glenelly, in the north-east of Tyrone, is also
remarkable as being the birth-p!ace of the great Saint Colman-Ela. Glenelly
appears in the Annals of the Four Masters under the names of Gleann foichle (ad.
an. 854), and Gleann aichle (ad. an. 1600). Thus we are able to understand the
following passage of St. Colman’s Life :—‘‘ There was a man of venerable life,
Colman by name, of a noble family of Erin, descended from the Hy Neill, and
his father was named Beogne. Now this man, being compelled to fly with his family
from Meath, which waslaid waste by the Lagenians, took refuge in the valley of Hoic/e,
and there St. Colman was born.” —Lider Kilken., in Marsh’s Library, fol. 129 b.
In the Annals of the Four Masters (ad. an. 992), it is recorded that ‘‘ Muireagan,
of Both-domhnaigh, successor of Patrick, went upon his visitation in Tirowen, and
he conferred the degree of king upon Aedh, son of Domhnall, in the presence of
Patrick’s, congregation, and he afterwards made a great visitation of the north of
Treland.

3 Both Mheidhbhe literally means ‘‘ Meva’s house,” and is now called Bovevagh,
which corresponds in pronunciation with the original name. St. Aidan, who was
of the same race with the O’Conors of Keenaght, is referred to this church in the
Irish Calendar. His genealogy is thus given by Colgan :—‘‘S. Aidanus de Both-
medhba, filius Fintani, filii Ke nbarchae, filii Conalli, filii Sobharnachi, filii Fin-
cholimii, filii Fiegi, filii Finchadii, filii Conlae, filii Tadgaei, filii Kieni, filii Ailildi
Olum.”—(77. Th. p. 478, n. 5.) Elsewhere Colgan tells us that St. Adamnan
was venerated in this church as patron. In King’s Visitation it is called ‘‘ Ecclesia
Sancti Eugenii,” but this is a mere clerical error for ‘‘ Ecclesia Sancti Eunani,”
#.¢., the Church of St. Adamnan. St. Ringan is also marked out by local tradition
as patron of this church, and an ancient tomb at the N.E. of the old church, is said
to be his. In the Annals of Innisfallen, at the year 1100 of the vulgar era, it is
recorded that ‘‘ the oratory of Both-Meva was burned.”

4The monastery of Cambas, more commonly called Camas, or Camus, was
founded by St. Comgall, and its connexion with St. Comgall’s great monastery was

M

