--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-112.png ---
92 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

were granted, in fee, to Sir Edward Fisher, Knt.". This is
the only information we have that there was a religious
house here.

"Rolls.

This place is now commonly called Dysert O’Dea from its having been the terri-
torial residence of the ancient Dalcasian sept of that name, (who were chiefs of the
Cinel Fearmaic in Thomond, and whose castle stands in ruins at a short distance to
the north-west of the old church, but it was also called Disert Tola, i.e., St. Tola’s
desert. Laniganin his Ecclesiastical History of Ireland, vol. iii., p. 171, and p.
173, notes 105, 106, 107, in his notice of St. Tola and Disert Tola, appears to
mistake the person and the place. He says :—‘‘ This Saint (Tola) was of the illus-
pee family of Ga/engi in the Queen’s County,” and places Disert Tola in the King’s

‘ounty.

The copy of O’Clery’s Book of Genealogies of the Saints of Erin, preserved in
the College of St. Isidore, in Rome, shows that he was not of the family of the
“ Galengi” of Leinster, but a Munsterman, and a kindred branch of the Dalcais, at
the head of whose territory Disert-Tola is situated. This book gives his genealogy
as follows :—‘‘ Tula, of Disert-Tula, son of Donchadh, son of Earbroinn, son
of Garbann, son of Senach, son of Muireadach, son of Failglinn, son of Broccan,
son of Carbmac, son of Taidg, son of Cian, son of Oilioll Olum,” &c.

This is sufficient to establish Dr. Lanigan’s error as to the family of St. Tola.
To identify the Place called Disert Tola we have only to consult the proper autho-
tities. The following note from the Félire Aenguis in the Leabrha Breac at the
Feast of St. Tola is conclusive enough on the subject :—

“Tola the pious from Disiurt Tola in the upper part of Dal g-Cais, and from Enach
Dairen in Uibh Failge.” Felire Aenguis, 30th March.

The following extracts from the ‘‘ Annals of the Four Masters,” at the year
A.D. 1589, confirm this Passages and leave no doubt as to the position and
antiquity of Disert-Tula or Disert O’Dea :—A.D. 1589. ‘t Dermot Oge, the son of
Dermot, son of Denis, son of Dermot, son of Conor, Bishop of Limerick, son of
Morough an Dana, O'Dea, died and was buried in his own town of Disert Tola, in
the cantred of Kinel-Fearmaic,-in the upper part of Dal g-Cais.”

The Conor O'Dea, Bishop of Limerick, above-mentioned, ‘‘ succeeded in the year
1400, resigned the see in 1420, and died in 1434. See Harris’s edition of Ware’s
Bishops p. 507, where this bishop is mentioned under the name of Cornelius O'Dea.”

O’Dea's castle stands in ruins a short distance to the north-west of
St. Tola’s church. This castle is mentioned in the description of the county of
Clare, written in 1585, and now preserved in the Manuscript Library of Trinity
College, Dublin, E. 2, 14, as the residence of Donell Mael O’Dea. See ‘‘Annals of
the Four Masters,” A.D. 1589, n. z. and A.D. 1598 n. w.

This place has been celebrated in history as the scene of the memorable battle of
Dysert O’Dea, fought on the roth May, 1318, by the Dal g-Cais of Thomond against
Richard De Clare and his army. This battle forms one of the finest episodes in the
Caithreim Toirdhealbhaigh, or History of the wars of Thomond, written by Magrath,
the Historian of Thomond, who was alive when the battle was fought, and probably
an eye-witness of what he has so eloquently described.

In this batt!e of Dysart O’Dea, Richard De Clare was slain by Conor O’Dea,
and his son fell at the same time by the hand of Feidhlim O’Conor of Corcomroe,
and four of his bravest knights, namely, Sir Henry De Capel, Sir Thomas De Naas,
Sir James De Cantelon (Condon), Sir John De Cantclon and other noble chiefs,
and the flower of his army, fell by the broad blades of the Dal g-Cais, and
the remnant of De Clare's army, dispirited at the fall of their leaders, gave
way on all sides and were pursued by the Dalcassian troops to the castle
of Bunratty, the stronghold and residence of De Clare. When the news of
the death of her husband and son reached De Clare’s wife at Bunratty, we are in-
formed that she abandoned the castle, set fire to the place, and took a final farewell
of the country, and that none of her descendants ever came back to claim it, and
since the memorable battle of Dysert O’Dea we find no mention of the name of
De Clare in the Annals of Thomond.

