--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-324.png ---
288 Ancient Monasteries of Ircland.

Balleowngnaballe, annual value 5s. besides reprises. These last
six carucates are in the country of the baron of Dungannon,
and all the said lands lie in the county of Down.—Chief
Rememb. ,

By another inquisition taken 13th August in same year,
it was found that the said warden and vicars were seized of
the walls of a chapel and thirty-three dyggs of land in Ean,
near Carlingford, in the county of Louth, annual value 6s. 8d,
besides reprises ; and of the rectory of Irishgraunge in Cowley,
annual value 33s. 4a. besides reprises, and the tithes of
Newton in Cowley, annual value 4os. besides reprises ; all
in the county of Louth, and appropriated to the said warden,
&c.— Chief Rememb.

22d April, 6th King Edward VI. a grant was made to
Nicholas Bagnall of this abbey, with the appurtenances,
seventy-two messuages cottages, and a carucate of land called
a ballyboe, in Newry aforesaid; the customs of Newry and
other customs, and several carucates of land in Moyturne,
Cormyne, alias Encthnynaghreta and Lyssene, Crasue, Lur-
gen, Dirrughboy, Cloughanrawyn, Dummole, Agher, Ne-
cloghe, Cornehoure, Crebehynnew, Mabege, Lyttillcorghe and
Tyllughterey, Grenan alias Borenmygan, Fyglassan in the half
town of Clonelea, Glassecoronade near Newry, Dirrelecagh
near Ballihovcenan, Edenmore near Dirrelecagh, Ryan, Dy-
serte, Kehanughe, half town of Tupyll, Hygrin, Croo and
Dromsconet, Steptoune, Athircenyn, Lessinellethe, Savel-
more, Ballyntoyrremore, Karremykkule, Corbrighaghe, Bally-
lecan, Castellanegan, Ballyshine, Sullaughnesowe, Eysnerye,
Fynnor, Ballyowneley, Graunge, Ardurre, Tawnaghmore in
the baronies of Dougeven’s country, Drounemynbybulle, Bal-
lyclonedroughballie, Balliaghcoraghtbulli, Balliheronhyun-
ughtbully, Ballicongua, with the rectory of Newry, parcel of
the possessions of said college, the tithes of Newry, Moy-
carice, Cromyne, alias Enagheonagthreta, Lysnerrasse near
Cromyne, Lurginderraghboy, Cloghaurawyn, Damole, Agher-
necloghe, Coruehoure, Crevekynewe, Mabege, Hytowlane,
Lytelcorcagh and Tillughtyrye, Brenan, alias Borenemygan,
half town of Clonelete near Mubege and Grasdron, Dirrele-
cagh near Ballihovenaue, Desarte, Kehanaghe, Croo and
Dromfernot, Shepetowne called Athruthin and Lissenellethe,
Savelmore, Ballyntorremore, Carrickmicstall, Corkreugh, Bal-
lilecan, half town of Castellanagan, Ballyshin, Tullaghnesowre,
Lysnery, Ballyownley, Granuge and Ardarre in the county of
Down, with the tithes of Newtone, in Cowley, in the county
of Louth, parcel of the said college, to hold the same for
ever in capite, without rent.—Chief Rememb.

