--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-209.png ---
County of Donegall, 181

‘ of Cluain-laodh, where St. Lugad, one of his disciples, is
honoured.» St. Carnech was abbot and bishop here about
the year 530, and was succeeded by Cassan, whose successor
was Massan. Clonleigh, we apprehend, was anciently called
Cruachanligean, or Druimligean,*® but we cannot determine
which.
This is now a parish church in the diocess of Derry.°
> Tr. Th., p. 495. ” Id., p. 494. °ld., p. 782.

from Lord O'Donnell, in that part, obtained with one small cyméa (cot) by night.
and only at ebbing of the water. The premises were of the yearly value, beyond
reprisal, of 3s. 4d. money of Ireland. By reason of certain statutes made, con-
firmed, and in this kingdom of Ireland established, all the premises appertain
to the now king, as annexed to his crown of Ireland. From the time of the
dissolution and suppression of the said late college or religious house of Clonlighe,
divers Bishops of Derry from time to time received, took, and raised all and sin-
gular the profits of the premises, until the time of the taking of this inquisition,
but of what right the jurors know not.” From this description it is evident that
Clonleighe was at the time of its suppression a vast and well endowed Ecclesias-
tical establishment, with Colleges, Schools, Religious House and a Church.
It was but natural therefore that it should give its name to the present impor-
tant parish of Clonleigh, in which is situated Strabane (white plain), one of the
most prosperous towns in the North of Ireland.

The old church of Clonleigh is still standing, bearing on its aged walls evidences
ofits past greatness. Colgan, in his notice of St. Cairneach, patron of Hy-Niall, gives
a prominent place to Clonleigh :—‘ Hagiographers.” he says, “ generally record
that St. Cairnechus was a bishop, but in what see he discharged his episcopal func-
tions they have not made known. I think, however, it was inhis monastery. For
that he was an abbot and had his monastery either in the place called Cruachan
Lighean, situated at the frith or arm of the sea, commonly called Loch Febhail,
and near the town of Liffer, or surely in some adjacent place, an ancient writer
has stated, who says that the land of Cruachan Lighean was bequeathed to him in
the will of Erca, his mother's sister, and daughter of Loarnus. Wherefore, since
in that land there are two churches, one called Donaghmore De Magh Jthe, and
another C/uain Laodh, the one towards the west, and the other towards the north,
not far from each other. I think that in one or other of these churches he dis-
charged the office of abbot and bishop also.”—Act. SS. p. 782. In the parish of
Clonleighe there is a townland called Croaghan, and a hill of the same name
about two miles from Lifford ; this, undoubtedly, is the land of Cruaghan Lighean,
which Colgan says was bequeathed to St. Carnechus. The hill is memorable in
the brightest period of our history; it was upon its great slopes Red Hugh
O’Donnell drew out his army in 1599. and challenged Dowcra. the English general,
to battle. The men of Tyrconnell still regard this hill with a deep feeling of
veneration. It stirs up within them, as they pass near it, the memory of their
illustrious chieftain who, to use the words of a brilliant writer, ‘‘is one of the
brightest and purest characters of any history.” The lamented D'Arcy M‘Gee, in
his ‘‘ History of Ireland,” p. 450, closes his beautiful sketch of Red Hugh in these
words :—‘‘ His youth, his eaily captivity, his princely generosity, his daring
courage, his sincere piety, won the hearts of all who came in contact with him.
He was the sword, as O'Neill was the brain, of the Ulster Confederacy—the
Ulysses and Achilles of the war—they fought side by side, without jealousy or
envy, for almost as long a period as their prototypes had spent in besieging Troy.”

But Colgan, in speaking of Clonleighe, makes special allusion to another church,
whichhecalls Donaghmore De Magh the, and places its situation to the west of Clon-
leighe. The ruins of this church also exist. It isa very old church, older than Clon-
leighe, for its name occurs in the Tripartite Life of St. Patrick, and its foundation is
attributed to him. This fact I have found in the following passage :—'‘ The man
of God (St. Patrick) determined to visit another son of King Niall, whose name
was Eugene, and to announce the faith of Christ unto him. He, therefore, began

