--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-155.png ---
County of Cork. 129

A.D. 1226. Patrick, the prior, was made bishop of Cloyne,
according to Sir James Ware ; but from the records it appears,
that W. then prior of Fermoy, was elected bishop of Cloyne,
and received the royal assent.P

® War. Bps. p. $75.

Omnach (now Glanworth), for it is the noblest of them, because it is one of the free
Tuaths of Cashel, with its border Tuaths, and Hi Ingaire, which is called Magh
Fece, is the noblest Baile of that Tuath, and Ceapach Inghin Ferchair is opposite
it on the other side; and Gleann Caintinn, out of which are Hi Caimh (i.e.
O'Keeffe) and Hi Digi; and Corr Tuath, out of which are Hei Finghin ; and
Lisleithisel, and Daire Hi Tnuthghaile ; Cathair Droinne,® out of which are Hi
Annratham (i.e. O’Hanrahan), DunMaelclaigh, ie the chief fortress of the
Eoganacht ; and Achad Loiscthi,!° out of which are Hi Lachtnain,!! Hi Dubh-
thaigh, Hi Leannain, and Hi Draighnein (é.¢. O'Drennan, or O'Drynan), i.e.
Ceall Ghallan ;* and Moin Banba, out of which are Hi Daronaigh and Lis na
Caille, out of which are Hi Dubhghaille and Hi Cleirigh ; and Rath Mor, out of
which are Hi Damain; Leath Baile Hi Conchobhair, for O’Conchobhair was
chief of Hi Inghaire, #.¢. of Magh Feige, and the [sub] denominations of this place
are—Dun Loibinn. i.¢. Teach an Turtain. and Cluain Dallain,!* and Moin Luachra,
and Ceall Garbhain ; and its boundaries are the line of road which leads from
Airgeatland’* to Cnocan Dun Martain, and whick passes down through that

lace to Abhann Mor, and the ditch west of Gort an Grain extending by Gort

roma Airthir to Leiscnen, along the course of Abhan Mor, and Hi Dallain;
are the hereditary occupiers of Cluain Dallain and of Moin Luachra and of Gort
an Grain, the church of Eoganacht Gleann Ommach is the principal church
and a third of the land of Brigh-Gobban belongs to that Tuath, se. Carrac-
Cormaic and Ceall-Danain, Cul Domhnann, Cluain Locha, Cluain Lena, Cluain
Cairbreach, Ceall-Bracain, Coirrlis Da Conall. Craes Cru, Tipra-Gruagain,
Tulach Aedha, Ard Catha, Cainn-Innse and Dun Draighnein to the east of Aith
Lis Ceindfaelaidh.

“ Since the two Tuaths of O’Cuain, namely Hi Maille Machaire, ‘and Hi
Ingardail’ were united into one Tuath, the chief Baille of Hi Ingardial, i.
Conbaid (hound drowning), because Finn’s hounds were drowned there, and out
of this place came Hi Buadhaigh. The Martra, i.c. Ath Ubhla, out of which
are Hi Aichir, Ceall Achid. out of which are Hi Lomthuile. The Creg, out of
which are Hi Riagain, Leitir. out of which are Hi Corcrain. The Recles, out of
which are Maeilluaigh, Cill Conaim is the chieftain of Hi Cain, and before they
were united into one Tuath O’Riagain was of Hi Ingardail.

‘* Hi Maille Machaire, i.e. Leac Glas and Cul Baedain out of which are Hi
Taimhainigh and Hi Fogartaigh, Leathnocht. in which are twelve tribe names,
viz.: O’Conbhaidhe from Cathair Meic Maille, Hi Gormachain, from Lis
Dormchada, Hi Uallachain, from Cuirr Hi Uallachain, Hi Lachtnain from
Fidhrus ; Meic Cuirc, from Cill Feichin, Hi Ceithernaighe, from Cnocan
Tulaird, Hi Caelbheannaighe, from Cuirr Hi Cacilbheannaighe. Hi Cuicneachain,
from Greallach, Hi Cuicneachain, Cill Cromglaisse, out of which are Hi Cuain,
Laiche Hi Fiaich, out of which are Hi Finneachta; Ard Fleada, out of which are
Hi Finneachta; Ard Fleada, out of which are Hi Cinnfhaelaidh, Manann, out of

of [Dirainn or] mountain land surrounding Fermoy on the north and east sides,
namely, Hi Rossa and Hi Cuccraidhe Sleibhe. ® Cathair Droime, now Caher
Droinge, situate about midway between Mitchelstown and Kilworth. The site of
this Cathair [or fortress] is now marked by the ruins of an old castle, which com-
mands a good view of the country many miles around, and which is marked on the
Ordnance Map of the County of Cork, sheet 19. }° Achadh Loischi, now St Nath-
alis, north of Glanworth. ‘Hi Lachtnain, now O’Lachtnan, sometimes written
O’Laughnane, and Iaughnane. 1 Ceall Gallain—The old church which gives
name to the parish of Kill Gullain, north-west ot Mitchelstown. See Ordnance
Map of County Cork. 1 Cluain Dallain, now Clandillane, east of the town of
Fermoy. ' Airgeatlaind, now Araglin.
K

