--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-131.png ---
County of Cork. 105

A Monastery for friars following the rule of St. Augustin,
was founded here by O’Callaghan’

Cloyne ,** In the barony of Imokilly, a poor village, yet is a
bishop’s see; with a good cathedral.

? Smith, vol. 2, p. 302. * Called by the Irish writers Cluainumha.

13 Cloyne.—The account given by Archdall of this ancient and venerable see is
meagre inthe extreme. The see of Cloyne was founded by St. Colman Mac Lenin,
who was closely allied by blood with the reigning family of Munster. His genealogy
in the Book of Lecan traces back his family to Mogha Nuadhat ; but the Martyrology
of Donegal leaves us in uncertainity as to whether he was descended from that
Prince, or from another distinguished chieftain named Lughaidh Lagha. In his
carly years he was famed for hisrare poetic talents, and was honoured with the title of
Royal Bard of Munster. In after times he dedicated his minstrelsy to religion,
and. composed several poems on sacred subjects—a fragment of one of these, being
an elegant metrical Life of St. Senanus—was known to Colgan, who describes it
as ‘‘stylo vetusto et pereleganti patrio sermone conscriptum.” (Acta SS., page
339). In the Book of Lismore, there is another short poem in Irish, composed by

t. Colman, in praise of St. Brendan. It thus begins :—

“Brendan, flame of victorious lightning ;
He smote the chafer, he ploughed the waves
Westward to the populous assemblative place—
The fair-sided Land of Promise.”

At the request of St. Ita, St. Brendan, on a certain occasion, went forward to
meet the youthful Colman, and admonished him to enter on a life of penance,
saying ‘‘ God has called thee to salvation, and thou shalt be as an innocent dove in
the sight of God.” Colman, throughout the remainder of his life, was docile to
the inspirations of grace, and became illustrious among the saints of Ireland by his
learning and virtues. Towards the close of his earthly pilgrimage, hearing of the
fame of the school of Lough Eirce, he wished, though himself a master in the
paths of perfection, to visit that monastery, and to enrol his name among the
disciples of St. Finbarr, Our annalists do not mark with precision the year in
which St. Colman founded the Monastery of Cloyne. It was certainly not before
the year §50, for it is recorded that, at the inauguration of Aodh Caomh, King of
Cashel, about that time, our saint took part as the royal minstrel of Munster.
There seems, however, no ground for doubting the acccuracy of the statement made
by O'Halloran in his History of Ireland (vol. 3rd, page 76) on the authority of the
Psalter of Cashel, that Eochaidh, Monarch of Ireland in the year 560, founded the
Church of Cloyne for St. Colman.

According to the Annals of the Four Masters, St. Colman died in the year 600
(#.¢., 601 of our present computation), and the 24th of November is the day on
which his festival. is marked in all the ancient calendars, and on which it is still
observed in the Diocese of Cloyne. Our patron of Cloyne must not be confounded
with another St. Colman, who was honoured on the same day: both these saints
are thus commemorated by St. A=ngus in his Felir6, at the 24th November :—

“* With Cianan of Daimliac,
A beautiful ear of our wheat,
Mac Lenine the most excellent,
‘With Colman of Dubh-chuillenn.”

The Martyrology of Donegal preserves the following quatrain, from the ancient
poem Naemhsheanchus, on the Saints of Ireland :—

“Colman, son of Lenin, the full,
And Mothemneog, son of Cerban,
Were of the race of two brothers—
Oilioll Oluim, and Lughaidh.””

