--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-139.png ---
County of Cork. 113

which is generally supposed to be that particular hollow in
which a great part of the city of Cork stands. St. Barr died
at Cloyne, but was interred in his own Church, where his

Towards the close of the 1oth century, Columb Mac Kieregan sent this relic, borne
by two priests, as a protection to Mahoun Mac Kennedy, King of Munster. It
was brought back stained with that prince’s blood, and our annalists relate that
Bishop Cormac, raising his hands to heaven, uttered a prophecy (inserted in the
‘Wars of the Danes,’ p. 93,) in which, execrating the dread sacrilege which had
been perpetrated, he prophetically foretold the future fate of the murderers,

St. Bernard, in his life of St. Malachy, has preserved to us an interesting account
of the appointment of a bishop of this see in the year 1140, We will give in full
the narrative of this great doctor of the Church :—‘* About the year 1140 a vacancy
occurred in the see of Cork ; dissensions followed, each party being desirous of
electing one pleasing to themselves, heedless of the choice of God. Malachy, hear-
ing of such dissensions, proceeded thither. Having assembled the clergy and
people, he restored to union their hearts and their desires, for all agreed to leave
the selection of their future bishop to him whose pastoral solicitude extended to that
and to all the other churches of Ireland. He then chose for the see, not one of
the princes of the land, but one from among the poor, whom he knew to be holy
and learned, and one, moreover, who was not a native of that diocese. This person
being sought for, was found laid up with illness, and so weak that he was unable to
proceed abroad, except when borne on the arms of assistants. Then Malachy said,
‘In the name of God I command him to arise: obedience will restore him to
health.’ What was the poor man now to do? He was anxious to obey, but he was
unprepared to do so ; and even were he able to go thither, yet he feared the epis-
copal ministry. Thus the twofold enemy of sickness and fear of the burden strug-
gled against his desire to obey; nevertheless this was victorious. the hope of salva-
tion coming to its aid. Therefore he makes an effort; he raises himself up; he
tries his strength ; he finds that his strength has increased. With his material
strength his faith also increases, and this, too, becoming more robust, reflects its
firmness on his physical powers And now he arises by himself ; he moves about
without difficulty; he feels no fatigue in walking. At length, without the help of
an assistant, he proceeds, sane and courageous, to Malachy, who placed him in the
see, amidst the applause of the clergy and people. Thus was all done in peace:
for, seeing the miracle, no one dared to resist the decision of Malachy, and neither
did he who was chosen make further opposition, seeing that the will of God was
so manifestly made known.”"—( Vita S. Malachia, cap. viii.)

Lynch, in his MS. History, justly supposes that the holy bishop thus chosen by
St. Malachy was Giolla-Aedha O'Muidhin, who took part in the Synod of Kells
in 1152, and who is celebrated in our Annals as “a man full of the grace of God,
the tower of virginity and of wisdom in his time.” He was of the A/uinter-aedh,
on the borders of Lough Con, and as he was still living when St. Bernard wrote,
his name is not mentioned in the above narrative. He restored the church and
rebuilt the monastery.which, in after times, was called from him *‘ Gille- Abbey.”
His death is marked in our Annals in the year 1172.

He was succeeded by Bishop Gregory, who governed the see fourteen years.
He made a grant of the Church of ge Nessan, in Cork, to the monks of St.
Thomas, Dublin, together with its lands, tithes, and other offerings, on condition
of the payment of a cask of wine annually. A charter of Dermot, King of
Munster, during his episcopate, makes known to us another church of this city,
dedicated to St. John the Evangelist. This important document is as follows :—

«Dermot, by favour of Divine Providence, King of Munster. to all the faithful

ple greeting and peace fot ever.

«Being fully persuaded of the fleeting nature of human memory, and of the
unstable pomp of a perishable world, we have on that account decreed to record
in writing the affectionate zeal with which our father, Cormac of blessed memory,
King of Munster, built and confided to the protection of his people the Church of
St. John the Apostle and Evangelist, at Cork, for the use of Archbishop Maurice and
his successors, and for the pilgrims out of Connaught, the compatriots of St. Barre.

I

