--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-259.png ---
County of Down. 227

gor. The abbot Indrect, the son of Dobalenus, died the

26th of April.
919. Died the abbot Mainach, the son of Shiell, esteemed

the most learned writer of the Irish."
Act, SS., p. 254. *1d., p. 107.

Erigena, and many others, show how much that classical language was studied in
our schools. ~ .

I will now place before the reader the various entries in the Annals of the Four
Masters relative to the abbots of Bangor. You will observe that the order of
succession, as recorded in them, precisely corresponds with that in the Antiphonary
of Bangor.

A.D. 600. “ St. Congall, of Bangor, abbot of Bangor, in Ulster, died on the
tenth day of May, after having been thirty years, three months, and ten days in the
abbacy of Bangor. His age was ninety years.”

A.D. 605. ‘St. Beoghna, abbot of Bangor (next) after Congall, died on the
12th of August.”

A.D. 606. “St. Sillan, son of Cuimin, abbot of Bangor, and successor of Con-
gall, died on the 28th of February.” We do not find the name of Aedh in the
annals, though he is set down in the hymns as intervening between Beogna and
Silanus. His name seems to be omitted in the annals on account of the short
period of his office. Colgan, in the Acta Sanctorum, at the 28th of February,
speaking of Sillan, says that he was surnamed “ The Master,” on account of his
learning, and that after he had presided over the schools of Bangor, he was pro-
moted to its abbacy. During the time he presided over the monastery, we read
that—

A.D. 611. “The Church of Bangor, in Ulster, was burned.”

A.D. 612. “ Fintan, of Antrim, abbot of Bangor, died.” We should observe
that from this period a very close connexion existed between the churches of
Antrim and Bangor.

A.D. 645. “ MacLaisre, abbot of Bangor, died on the 16th of May.”

A.D. 665. “Segan Mac-h-Ui-Cuinn, abbot of Bangor, died.” His festival
was afterwards kept in Bangor on the roth of September.

The hymn in the Antiphonary gives the succession after Segene as Berechanus,
Camine, Columba, Aidan, and then Baithene ; but in our own native annals there
seems to be some confusion. The Four Masters give, at A.D. 665, ‘‘ Baeithin,
abbot of Bangor, died ;” and, at A.D. 666, “a great plague raged in this year, of
which died four abbots at Bangor, of Ulster—namely, Bearach, Cummine, Collum,
and Aedhan, their names.” The obit of Baeithin is probably antedated. Berach’s
festival was celebrated on the 21st of April, and that of St. Cummine on the 17th

of September.
A.D. 668. ‘‘Critan, abbot of Bangor, died. Mochus, son of Uist, died.” The
Annals of Clonmacnoise make this entry :—‘Critan, abbot of Beanchor and

Mochwa, abbot of Reanchor, died.” It is probable there is an error in the Clon-
macnoise entry ; for Mochua does not occur in the hymn of the Antiphonary of
Bangor.

AD. 671. Maelrubha, abbot of Bangor, went to Alba (Scotland), and founded
the church of Aporcrosan (Applecross, in Ross-shire), Maelrubha does not occur
in the hymn, perhaps because he had resigned shortly after his appointment ; he
was living at the time the hymn was written. It is stated in the glossary to the
“Felire of Aengus” that he was of the Kinel-Owen, and that his mother was Sub-
taire, daughter of Setna, and the sister of Comgall, of Bangor. This is not very
probable ; for St. Comgall died at the age of 91, in the year 601, and Maelrubha,
who was eighty years of age in 721, must have been born in 641.

A.D. 678. “Colman, abbot of Bangor, died.” He is called Caman in the hymn.

A.D. 688. “ Cronan MacCaulne, abbot of Bangor, died on the 6th of November.”
Cronan was living when the hymn was written, from which it follows that its
date is some year between 678 and 688.

A.D. 704. “Ceanfaeladh, grandson of Aedh Breac, abbot of Bangor, died.”
He belonged to the same race as St. Congall. Aedh Breac was Prince of the

