--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-127.png ---
County of Cork. 103

Cape Clear Island*® is the most southern part of Ireland and
contains twelve ploughlands ; on the north-west point stands
a castle built on a rock in the sea, and called Dunanore; to
the east of which is the cove of Tra Kieran, or St. Kieran’s
strand, where we find a pillar of stone, with a cross rudely
cut towards the top, supposed to have been the work of that
Saint; this stone is held in great veneration by an incredible
number of pilgrims. who assemble round it every 5th of
March, on which day his festival is celebrated; a church in
ruins under the invocation of St. Kieran adjoins this pillar.*

St. Comgall, a disciple of St. Finbarr, was abbot of
Inisdoimhle,> and we meet with a St. Killian, who was
abbot here.*

820, 823, and 851. This island suffered from many de-
vastations.

953. Died the abbot Dunlang, son of O’Dunagan.?

960. The island was again despoiled.“4

Carigiliky ; In the parish of Miros in West Carbery. Here
are the foundations of some extensive ruins, with a large
cemetery ; this probably was the site of the abbey of Maure
or of the Clear Spring, which was founded A.D. 1172, by
Dermot M‘Cormac M‘Carthy, King of Desmond, who sup-
plied it with Cistercian Monks from the abbey of Baltinglass ;*
some writers place this foundation three years earlier.!

A.D. 1252. Patrick was abbot.®

1291. The abbot sued Dovenald O’Maythan for a messuage
and four carucates of land in Ardocherys.®

1519. The abbot John Imurily was made bishop of Ross in
this year.!

5th December, 30th Queen Elizabeth, this abbey with its
appurtenances in the towns of Maure, Leshinau, Curraghenin,
Lehenaugh, le Graunge, le Garnans, le Curragh, Ardgehan,

* Was ealled anciently Inisdaimhle and Inis Uladh, that is, Insula Ulidiorum.
Act. SS. p. 629; and in the Ecclesiastical books, we find it under the name of Insula
Sanctae Clarae. * Smith, vol. 1. p. 286. > Act. SS. p. 597. ° Id. p. 330. © Tr.

Th. p. 633. * Ann. Four Masters. “4 Tr, Th. p. 633. ¢ War. mon. Pembridge.
© Canobia Cistert. © King, p.396. *Jd. ‘Jd.

10 Cape Clear Island.—Archdall identifies Cape Clear Island and Inishdoimhle,
and in this he may be right. Colgan, however, who is referred to in proof, expressly
states that Inisdoimhle, also called Inis- Uladh ‘‘ex eo quod sancti de Ultonia eam in-
coluerant,” was situated in the river Suir on the confines of the Deisiand Hy-Kinselagh
**jacetque in confinibus Desiorum et Hi-Kenselach, in Surio flumine” (Acta SS.
pages 629, 630). The Martyrology of Donegal corroborates this opinion of Colgan.
At 1st December (page 325), it states that Inis-Doimhli was called Inis-Uladh,
“because the Ulstermen inhabited it,” and at 4th July, it describes the situation
of the island as ‘‘ between Ui-Ceinnselagh (county of Wexford) and the Deisi
(Waterford).” This description would make it probable that Inisdoimhle was the
ancient name of the island in the expansion of the Suir, near Waterford, now called
“Little Island.”

