--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-211.png ---
County of Donegall. 183

he died on the 8th of February, between the years 587 and
6528 i and Sitrick O’Trutle, archdeacon of Congbail, died in
1204.

This also is a parish church, in the diocess of Raphoe.!
¢ Cnodain ; \ies to the North of the river Erne, near Astrath,
in the barony of Boylagh and Bannagh. St. Conan, or
Connan, was abbot here about the end of the 6th century.*

© Act. SS., p. 406. » Ann. Munst. ' Liber Visit. * Act. SS., p. 563.

down the coffin in which Godfrey lay on the street of the village of Conwall, and
the brave chieftain immediately expired. The incident is thus expressed in a
thrilling and popular ballad :—

“Now proud and high Tirconnell shouts, but bleeding, on the gale
Upon the ear ascendeth now asad and sullen wail ;
For on that field, as back they bore, from chasing of the foe,
The spirit of O’Donnell fled !—oh, woe for Ulster, woe !

“* Yet died he there all gloriously—a victor in the fight—
A chieftain at his people’s head, a warrior in his might.
They dug him there a fitting grave, upon that field of pride—
And a lofty cairn raised above, by fair Lough Swilly’s side.”

Within easy distance of Conwall is the Scariff-Hollis, made memorable by the
Annals, It was the chief pass into the Highlands of Tirconnell, and therefore the
scene of many a deadly conflict. Shane O’Neill (the Proud) fled across it with the
remnant of his gallant army after his signal defeat by Hugh Duv O’Donnell, and
in the now ruined castle on the bank over it that “Caffar, the son of Manus, son
of Hugh Duy, son of Hugh Roe, Tanist of Tirconnell, a man of a bounteous,
munificent, and truly hospitable character, and the favourite of the distres~ed and
the learned of the North of Ireland, died in his own mansion seat of Sgurd/sholis,
on the 15th of October, and was buried at Donegal,” (Annals). But a melancholy
interest is attached to Scariff-Hollis from the fact, that here Bishop Heber
McMahon was driven to fight or surrender to the English under Sir Charles Coote
and Colonel Venables on the 21st of June, 1650. The bishop chose to fight rather
than surrender, whereupon the English cavalry, more than twice as numerous as
his, all but annihilated his little army. A most interesting account of this
terrible fight is given in the Curiosa Hibernica; it is from the pen of Colonel
Henry McTully O'Neil, who served under General Owen O’Neil, the commander
of the Irish army at this time. “ Being,” he says, “under cure of my wounds, I
was not an eye-witness of the action at Letterkenny ; but what I have by hearsay,
and by an officer that was in the action, who assured me that the bishop was 4,000
strong when he marched to Tyrconnell. When the army came to Letterkenny,
Colonel Miles Swiney made an humble request of the bishop to give him and his
regiment leave to march to Castledoe to try if he could gain it for their future
security in that part of the country, which was granted, but was wanting after-
wards, as many others were that were left in garrisons up and down in those parts,
which very much weakened the army the day of the action. It appeared to this
gentleman that the enemy’s horse of Scotch and English were as many as the Irish

ad of horse and foot. The Scotch who were protected by the bishop in those
parts, and particularly Colonel Saunderson, bore a great share in defeating him
the last day, the first day’s engagement being a fortnight before, was thus :—The
bishop’s army coming to a pass on the river between Lifford and Derry, the tide
beginning to flow, the colonels were commanded to cast dice as to who would
venture over the ford with his regiment first. Phelim McTuol O'Neil, though
his turn was that day to be in the rear, said he would cast no lots, but would
venture over, which he did with some difficulty, and beat off the horse on the other
side, whereby he gave the whole army liberty to march over leisurely, some being

