--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-090.png ---
70 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

abbey of Cella magna deathreib; we hear no more of it as an
abbey ; it is now a bishop's see in the barony of Loughtee.*

Lough Oughter, in the barony of Loughtee.

About the festival of Christmas, in the year 1237, or in
1249, Claros M‘Moylin O’Moillchonry, archdeacon of Elphin,
brought the white canons of the order of Premonstre from
Trinity Island in Lough Kee, in the county of Roscommon,
to Lough Oughter in the Brenie, Cathall O'Reilly making
a grant of the ground ;" the abbey was dedicated to the

Holy Trinity.®
"Tr. Th. p, 381. ‘Annal. Four Masters. “M'Geog.

epithet was added to Kilmore to distinguish it from another church of the same name,
which from its position on the river Shannon was called Xi/more-na-Sinna “ Kilmore
of the Shannon.” The monastery of A7i/more- Dithruibh was one of those founded by
St. Columbkille before his mission to Scotland, and mention is made by Adamnan of
a miraculous manifestation which was there made to him (lib. i., cap. §0. Reeves’s
‘* Adamnan,” page 99.) In the life of St, Munna it is also related that St, Columb-
kille presided over that monastery, and St. Munna lived for some time there as one
of his disciples : “ Venit B, Munnaad scholam S, Columbae, qui tunc erat magister
in loco qui dicitur Scotice Ceallmor Dithraimh, id est, Cella magna remota, et ibi
S. Munna legit apud virum sapientem Columbam . . . Et mansit ibi B. Munna
ad tempus cum S. Columba vivens satis religiose.” (Colgan * Tr,'7h. page 469.)
Among the nineteen saints mentioned in the Martyrology of Donegal on the gth of
August we find the “ Four sons of Dioman of Kil-mor-Dithruibh.” The “ Annals
of Ulster” (ad an. 734) and the ‘‘ Four Masters” (ad an. 730) record the death of
St. Flann, son of Conaing, A6bof of Kilmore- Ditibh. The death of Crunnmael, Bishop
and Abbot of Cid-mor-Eimhire, is registered in the year 765, and again at 807
(vecte 812) we find the death of Flaithbheartach, 4d60t of Cillmor-Emhir. In 872 it
is also stated that C#//-mor-maighe-Emhir was plundered by the Danes. (F. M. ad
an. 827). O'Donovan conjectures that this was Kilmore near Armagh, but Lynch
in his AfS. History expressly identifies Kilmore-Emhir with Kilmore of the County
Cavan : “‘ Kilmoria (he thus writes) quondam Ai/moria Emeri dicta in Comitatus
Cavanensis regione quae Brefnia orientalis dicitur, sita est.” (fol. 191.) Lynch also
commemorates a second Bishop Fedhlimidh who held this see and died in the
year 841. The other Bishops of Kilmore mentioned by our Annalists are, Hugh
O’Finn who died at Inish-Cloghran, an island of Lough Ree, in 1136, Murchertach
O'Maelmocherge who died in 1149, and Tuathial O’Conaictaig, who was present at
the synod of Kells in 1152, and died, according to the “ Four Masters,” in 1179.
Florence or Flann O’Conaictaig, who died in 1231, was the first Bishop of this see
known to Ware. For the subsequent History of the Diocese of Kilmore, see
drish Ecclesiastical Record, vol. 2, page 485.

*The Abbey gave name to an island of Lough Oughter in which it was sit-
uated, and which is still called ‘‘ Trinity Island.” The ruins of the Abbey may
still be seen there, and its cemetery is the principal burial-place of that dis-
trict. Opposite Trinity Island, on the main land, is the townland of S/anore,
formerly Snalore, which was the site of a famous Abbey in the early ages of our
church. The Irish form of the name was Snamh Luthir, and Archdall makes
mention of it when treating of the county Sligo. Dr. O’Donovan, however (An.
F.M.ad an. 731,) and Reeves sufficiently expose this error of our author. The mon-
astery of Slanore was founded by St. Columban, son of Eochaieo, who died about
the year 640. His memory is honoured in our Martyrologies on September 6th
at Rosglanda, now Donaghmore, in the county of Tyrone, as well as in Snamh-
luthir. The festival of St. Comaigh, sister of Columban, was also kept in this
latter church on the 7th of May. This monastery was rendered famous in the
sixth century by two great miracles performed there. The first is mentioned in

