--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-123.png ---
County of Cork. : 99

gives name to the barony ; Dermot O'Sullivan Beare built a
beautiful small monastery on the sea-shore near this town, for
conventual Franciscan Friars, in the year 1320, and died in
the year 1466." It is now wholly demolished* mo

Inquisition 12th January, XX XIII. Queen Elizabeth, finds
that this religious foundation, with its appurtenances and a
watermill near the monastery, were of the annual value of 12d.

Bridgetown, on the river Blackwater, in the barony of
Fermoy. Alexander, the son of Hugh, founded a priory here,
in the reign of King John, which he endowed and dedicated
to the Virgin Mary, and supplied it with regular canons from
the priory of Newtown, in the county of Meath, and the abbey
of St. Thomas in Dublin.4 King Edward I. granted a con-
firmation of the endowment made by Alexander. The family
of Roche contributed largely to the possessions of this priory.

In the year 1375, King Edward III. directed his writ to the
bishops and commons to elect chosen persons, who were
immediately to repair to England, there to treat, consult,
and agree with his Majesty and council, as well touching the
government of this kingdom, as for the aid and support of the
war his Majesty was then engaged in. Thomas, the prior of
Bridgetown, was one of the persons appointed on this impor-
tant business.

Opposite the high altar is a ruined tomb of the founder.
The priory was pleasantly situated at the very confluence of
the rivers Awbeg and Blackwater, which glide through a deep
rocky glen opposite to the ruins.¢

Brigowne,’ one mile east of Mitchelstown, in the barony of
Clongibbons. St. Abban founded Brighgobban, which was
once a considerable place, and called a city." There yet

> War. Mss., vol. 34, War. Mon. °Is called in Irish Ballindroghed. 4 Monast.

Angl., vol. 2, p. 1045. eld. * Aylof's Calendar of ancient Charters, p. 452.
© Smith, vol. 1, p. 349. “Act. SS., p. 627.

lives. Subsequently, Daniel O’Sullivan, Earl of Beerhaven, having driven out the
English in the year 1602, partially destroyed it lest it should again become a strong-
hold of the enemy, promising, at the same time, to rebuild it as soon as possible.
This, however, he never was able to accomplish, for he was obliged to fly into
Snain, and there met an early death.”

8 Brigowne.—The following passage from the ‘‘Irish Life of Saint Abban,”
founder of Brigobban (Brigowne), shows that he founded and consecrated several
other churches in this district, and that he deposited a copy of the Liturgy of the
holy church in each of them ; he had at this time returned from Rome, having
founded several churches on the Continent on his homeward journey. The passage
is as follows :—

“ Aban returned into Erin, bearing the blessing of those multitudes with him.
Aban went into Connaught and founded three noble churches there, and he then
returned into Crioch Eachach Coincinn, in Criock Corca Duibhne, and he blessed
(consecrated) Boirnech and he gave it to Gobnaid ; and he blessed Cill Aithfe on
Magh Concin, and he gave it to Fionan; and Fionan foretold the coming of Aban
some years before his birth. He blessed Cul Cullaing and Brigoban, and Cill

