--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-251.png ---
County of Donegall. 219

founded an abbey at Tulachdubglaisse.t This is now a parish
church in the diocess of Raphoe.*

Tr. Th, p. 494. Liber Visit.

Antiquarians have alsoa good deal of Pagan interest in Torry. In remote
Pagan times it was one of the main strongholds of the Fomorians, one of whose
chiefs erected a tower on a cliff at the eastern extremity of the island, called Tor-
Connaing, celebrated in our pre-Christian annals as

“« The tower of the island, the island of the tower,
The citadel of Codnaing, the son of Toelar.”

Here was fought a famous battle, in which the fierce tribes of those early days
maintained the conflict on the strandat Port Doon tillthe returning tide buried nearly
all the combatants in the waves. Here the formidable “ Balor of the mighty blows”
had his head-quarters. This Balor isstill vividly remembered in the traditions of Torry
Island, where a very curious story is to!d of him, which Dr. O'Donovan, in his
learned edition of the Annals of the Four Masters, deemed worthy of a special
notice, The story runs thus :—In the days of yore there lived three brothers,
Gavida, MacSamthaim, and MacKineely, the first of whom was a distinguished
smith, who kept his forge at Drunnatinne, a place in the parish of Rath-Finan.
MacKineely was lord of that district, comprising the parishes of Rath-Finan and
Tullaghobegly, and owned a cow called Glas Gaizvlen, so lactiferous as to be
greatly coveted by the neighbours. At this period Torry Island was governed by
a famous captain called Balor, who had one eye in the middle of his forehead, and
another directly opposite it in the back of his skull. This latter eye, like that
of the basilisk, had a mortiferous power, and was kept constantly closed by Balor,
except when he wished to destroy an adversary with it. A druid had prophesied
that Balor should be murdered by his own grandson. To nullify this prediction
he shut up his only child, a daughter, in an impregnable tower built on the summit
of Tormore, a cliff on the north-east of the island, under the keeping of twelve
matrons, whom he strictly charged to keep her not only from intercourse with, but
even from the knowledge of the existence of the male sex. Time passed, and
Ethnea grew into a beautiful woman. Balor. now apparently secure against the
prediction ofthe Druid, at the head of an adventurous band of sea-rovers, swept the
neighbouring coast from thesea, but hisambition could not besatisfied unless with the
possession of the Glas Gaivlen. One day the MacKineely above-mentioned having

ad occasion to go to his brother’s forge to get some swords made, took with him
the Glas Gaivlen on a halter. Arrived at the forge, he entrusted the cow to his
brother, MacSamthain, who was there too on a similar errand. While Mac-
Kineely was within, Balor, in the form ofa little red-haired boy, came to Mac-
Samthain and told him that he had just heard his two brothers saying, inside the
forge, that they would use all his (MacSamthain’s) steel in making MacKineely’s
swords. MacSamthain, deceived by the boy, gave the cow in charge to his little
red-raired friend, and rushed into the forge. Balor, taking advantage of his
opportunity, carried off the Glas Gaivlen to Torry Island, and the place on which
he dragged her up on the island is to this day called Port-na-Glaise, or the harbour
of the green cow. MacKineely, suspecting that a fraud had been practised
on his brother by Balor, ran out of the forge, when lo! he saw the Fomorian chief
with the cow in the middle of the sound of Torry. Grieved to distraction at the loss
of his Glas Gaivlen, he made known his case to a friendly Druid living not far
from the place. The Druid told him that the cow was irrevocable as long as Balor
lived, as he could keep his basilisk eye always open to destroy any one who dared
approach her. Accordingly, MacKineely set about compassing the destruction of
this fatal eye, and for this purpose called to his aid his familiar sprite, ‘* Biroge of the
mountain.” She dressed him in the robes of a young girl, and wafting him across the
sound to the tower of Ethnea, where, by representing her ward as a noble lady just
rescued from a tyrant who attempted to carry her off, she succeeded in introducing
MacKineely to Ethnea, who immediately became enamoured of him. The result of this
intercourse was, that in due time Ethnea gave birth to three sons, whom Balor secured

