--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-322.png ---
286 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

1329. Radulph was abbot before this year, when the abbot
of Mellifont paid into the Exchequer the sum of £41, being
the amount of fines for the abbots of Granard and Cashel,
and Radulph, late abbot of Newry, in which sum they were
amerced by the Sheriff of Uriel!

1335. Roger, the abbot, wasindicted by Adam Pyesson and
William Rede, for unlawfully taking and detaining an horse,
the property of the said William; on the non-appearance of
the said Roger, the Sheriff was ordered to attach him®

1373. This convent being found to be mere Irish, conversing
only with such, and spending their rents and profits in abetting
the said Irish, King Edward ITI. seized their lands, a carucate
and an half, in the county of Louth; and 2oth of February,
in this year, he granted the same, at the rent of forty shillings,
to James Bellew for life, if they should so long continue in
the King’s hands.®

1526. The abbot Glaisne, son of Hugh Magennis, was slain ;
see Downpatrick.

1543. John Prowle, the late abbot, was appointed warden,
when this house was converted into a collegiate church, at the
suit of Sir Arthur Magennis.!

College; this college consisted of a warden and vicars
choral. 28th June, 30th King Henry VIII., a confirmation of
all their possessions was granted to them, reserving only to
the crown the yearly rent of four marcs.* But in a few
years it was totally destroyed.

The abbot exercised episcopal jurisdiction over the lord-
ships of Newry and Mourne; which is still enjoyed by a
Mr. Needham, descended from Sir Nicholas Bagnal, to whom
King Edward VI. granted this abbey; the seal of his court
is a mitred abbot in his albe, sitting in a chair supported by
two yew-trees; with this inscription:—Sigillum exempte
jurisdictionis de Viridi ligno, alias Newry et Mourne.!

Inquisition, 1oth August, 3rd King Edward VI, finds that
the said warden, John Prowle, and his vicars choral, 21st May
last, had voluntarily surrendered the said college, church,
steeple, and cemetery, chapter-house, dormitory and hall, two
orchards and one garden, containing one acre, within the pre-
cincts of the college, of no value besides repairs; and of
seventy-two messuages and cottages, a carucate of land, other
wise called a ballyboe, in the townland of Newry, annual
value, besides reprises, 40s.; two salmon weirs on the river of
Glanrye, with a water mill and the customs of the market of
the town of Newry, annual value 13s. 4d. besides reprises ;

! King, p. 135. "/d., p.136. %Jd., p. 135. | War. Canob., p. 63, and Hist.
County of Down, p.9o. * Aud. Gen. ' Hist. County of Down, p. 90.

