--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-258.png ---
226 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

but the time when he lived is not mentioned® We also meet
with a St. Regulus, whose feast is on the 11th of June, but
the time he lived in is uncertain; and it is not recorded
whether he was abbot or only a private monk?

755. Died the abbot Suarlech.

775. Died Augustin of Beanchor.*

791. Died the abbot Thomas.

801. Died the abbot Maccoigi.™

812. The Danes burnt the town and abbey this year,"

818. They again plundered it, breaking open the rich shrine
of St. Comgall, and putting the abbot and his monks to death.°

823. They renewed their depredations this year.P

© Fleming, Coll. “Jd. ‘Id. * Tr. Th., p.185. 1 M°Geogh. ™ Annal. Ulster.
2 Annal. Munster. ° Keating. Tr. Th., Index. ® Annal. Munster.

“ Beracanus was a distinguished man ;
Cumine also possessed of grace ;
Columba a congenial shepherd ;
Aidan without complaint ;
Baithene a worthy ruler ;

Crotan a chief president ;
Whom the Lord, &c.

“To these, so excellent, succeeded Caman,
A man to be beloved by all,
Singing praises to Christ,
He now sits on high. That Cronan
The fifteenth, may lay hold on life
The Lord preserve him.
‘Whom the Lord will gather
To the mansions of his heavenly kingdom.

“The truest merits
Of these holy abbots
Meet for Comgill,
Most exalted we invoke
That we may blot out
All our offences,
Through Jesus Christ,
Who reigns for ages everlasting.”

Thus, did the monks of old in Bangor, and its various dependent monasteries,
scattered everywhere through Europe, from Belfast Lough to the banks of the
Ticino, in Italy, keep up a pious remembrance of their abbots. The hymn itself
is rire teenie to assist the memory, for after the introductory verse the lines
run in alphabetical order, beginning :—

“* Amavit Christus Conigillum ;
Bene et ipse Dominium.”
‘Christ loved Comgill ;
Well, too, did he the Lord.”

In this way it devotes a line to each letter of the alphabet till it comes to—
“Zcen ut carpat Cronanus,”
“ That Cronan may lay hold on life.”

It is worthy of remark that zen isa Greek work. The Irish ecclesiastics of that
period displayed a wonderful taste for Greek. The writings of Johannes Scotus

