--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-183.png ---
County of Cork. 157

by Richard, second Earl of Cork, to Samuel Hayman, Esq., a Somersetshire
gentleman.

1848.—16 May. The Ballast Board having decided on erecting a Harbour
Light-House at Youghal, an inquisition was held this day for the purpose of
valuing the ground at the harbour’s mouth, formerly occupied by the Nunnery
of St. Anne’s, and the jury awarded £100. So admirably chosen had been the
site of the Anglo-Norman light Tower, that almost on the very same spot was it
found desirable to erect the new beacon, and the demolition of the ancient inter-
esting structure became inevitable. A description of the Tower of St. Anne’s
will not be unacceptable. It was circular, about 24 feet in height, and 1o in
diameter. The only entrance was a narrow Gothic doorway, on the water-side,
facing the East point of the harbour. The visitor found at his right hand, on
entering, the bottom of a flight of stone steps, which were conducted spirally on
the whole interior of the building, and led at the summit to two large circular-
headed windows, one of which opened on the middle of the Bay and the other
faced Capel Island. As is customary in all Light-houses, there was no open
on the land-sides.

Kilcoran, or the Shanavine Monastery. About a mile outside Youghal, on the
South, in the townland of Seafield and adjoining that of Ballyclamasy, is a little field
called The Shanavine, which may be interpreted as The Old Asylum or Sanctuary.
As the field dips down, it forms, with ifs neighbouring height, a small well-sheltered

len, through which a trickling streamlet finds its way. On the slopes of the

hanavine an old religious house was founded. The early missionaries chose
the site, with their wonted judgment. The view from it was beautiful. The blue
waters of Youghal bay formed the prospect in front, and were bounded on one
side by the headlands at the mouth of the harbour, and on the other by the rising
eminence of Claycastle. Around the monastery rose the thick foliage of the forests,
which at the period clothed the landscape in every quarter. Like all early places
of worship in Ireland, the church was of small dimensions, about 40 feet in length
by 18 in width. It consisted of a Nave and Choir. Near it to the N., were resi-
dences of the religious; and on the S.W., almost at the very walls of the church,
was a spring-well in which many of the natives perhaps found their Baptistry,
The road leading to this monastery is one of the most ancient thoroughfares about
Youghal, and preserves the name of the Saint to whom the church was dedicated.
It is called Kilcoran, #.¢., Cill-Kuarain, The Church of St. Cuaran, one of the
patrons of the Desies. This holy Bishop was son of Nethsemon, and in our an-
cient monuments receives the epithet of ‘The Wise.’ He was cotemporary of St.
Columbkille, and from a reform which he introduced in the recital of None, was
sometimes called ‘Mochuaroc de Nona.’ In the Feliré of St. Aingus he is thus
commemorated :—

** Whosoever true delight desires
Without grief, in the land of Saints,
Let him invoke Mochuaroc,

And recite all None.”

The Church, roofless, but otherwise in good condition, was standing in 1790.
About this year, a farmer ef the neighbourhood demolished its walls and con-
structed a barn with the materials. The story has it, that he straightway fell into
bad health, his body swelling up in dropsy and his arms withering in decay, and
thus he died miserably. Such was the terror created by his doom, that no labourer
could be induced to cultivate the field, until the owner, Mr. Seward, resolved to
break it up in 1849. The plough was now brought in, and the foundations of the
different buildings were discovered and were wholly taken away. The only relics
of the Monastery now visible are a few old moss-grown and weather-worn stones,
which give some clue to the style and date of the building. Five of these are
moulded, three with Norman beads. Two were parts of door-jambs ; the rest are

jieces of windows,—a jamb, a mullion, and part of a circular arch. From these
fragments we are inclined to set down this portion as of the middle Norman
period, cive, 1060 ; but the Monastery itself was, we doubt not, of a much earlier
late.

