--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-239.png ---
County of Donegall. 207

the 1st of January, 24th of July, and 16th of December.’ St.
Dabeoc is said to have been buried in this abbey, which he
made subject to the great abbey of Armagh; it had aefine
chapel, with convenient houses for the monks, the remains of
which may yet be seen.1 One of the Saint Patricks was prior
here about the year 850."

Notwithstanding the reputed holiness of this celebrated
monastery, it was plundered and reduced to ashes by Brat-
achas O’Boyle and M‘Mahon, A.D. 1207." John was prior in
1353.

St. Patrick’s purgatory, as it is called, was first fixed in this
island, but it being near to the shore, and a bridge from the
mainland giving the people a free and easy access into it, the
cave was closed up, and another was opened in a lesser island,
about half a mile from the shore. Some people have given
the invention of this purgatory to the great St. Patrick, but
others, with more probability, ascribe it to Patrick who was
prior here about the year 850." This purgatory continued a
long time in high repute both at home and abroad. We find,

? War. Mon. % Richardson, supr. *War. Mon. *Annal. Munst. * Ogygia.
" War. Mon.

of the Purifying element of fire ; some becoming effulgent by slow and almost im-
perceptible degrees, as having no friends to pray for them; while others glowed
in the furnace, and cast off the foul crust with amazing rapidity by the force of the
prayers and alms which their friends offered for them on earth. Some he saw
escaping from the flames and winging their course to heaven ; others almost bright
enough to attempt the same. But deep buried in the abyss he perceived others
who were destined to converse with the groans of ten thousand years for having
been guilty of venial sins, which, though they bordered very closely on mortal, did
not stain the soul through and through, as mortal sin doth. These looked up with

iteous eyes towards earth expecting the prayers of their children and friends, and
eeling the punishment of one second there longer and more severe than that of a
hundred years on earth. St. Patrick, awed by this vision, departed from the cave,
and ordered that henceforward the island should be a terrestrial purgatory, where
sinners could wash off all their sins by prayer and fasting. They were all to be
confined in the cave, and should they see the same vision vouchsafed to St. Patrick
(which many did), it was a favourable sign of the acceptability of their prayers
and mortifications.” St. Dabheog, or Davoc, a disciple of St. Patrick’s, re-
mained behind to carry out his master’s design, which he did by establishing on
the island that penitential retreat which has been famous for fourteen
centuries, and where from ten to fifteen thousand pilgrims come to do penance
every year, from the Ist of June to the 15th of August. St. Babheog
founded here also a church and monastery, and thus in a short time it became
one of those celebrated centres whence issued that broad and deep stream of
piety and learning which made Ireland, before the Danish invasion, highest
among the nations of Europe. In the Martyrology of Donegal, we have,
under the Ist of January, the following notice of St. Dabh and his establish-
ments on Loughderg :—‘‘ At the eastern extremity of that lake are Patrick's Pur-
gatory and Dabheog’s Island ; there is also a monastery, in which there were
canons, at the eastern extremity of the same lake. . . . There are five beds of hard
penance there, round which the pilgrims the bed of Patrick, of Columbkille,
of Brigid, of Adamnan, of Dabheog.” Ecigan, in his Acta Sanctorum, tells us
* food deal, too, of St. Dabheog and Loughderg. ‘ Dabheog,” he says ‘‘is
called Dabeocus, in general, and often Beoanus, in Latin. He is the patron of

