--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-200.png ---
174 Anctent Monasteries of Ireland.

time became very rich. It was plundered A.D. 1203, by
Diermit Hua Lochluinn, who at the head of a party of
foreigners attempted to plunder Kinel-eoguin, but the Lords
of that country pursuing them, Diermit with many of his party,
fell.x

Moycosquin ;® Three miles south west of Coleraine and in
that barony.

Moycoscain, or the abbey of the Virgin Mary of the Clear
Spring, was founded for monks of the Cistertian order’ A.D.
1172.2 The abbot John was made bishop of Derry by the
Pope in the year 1401, and he died in 1419."

Rathregenden ; Colgan says, that Rathregenden was a
church in the diocese of Derry, and that it was founded by
St. Columb for his disciple St. Baitan, or Boedan ;> it is now
unknown.

Templefinlaghan ;™ on Loughfoyle, in the barony of
Kenoght.

St. Columb founded Tamlacht-fionlugain, and made St.
Finnlugan, his disciple, abbot-; it is now a parish church in
the diocess of Derry,° and is named Tamlaghtfinlaghan, or the
church of Finnlugan.4

* Tr. Th., p. 493. % Wares Mon. * Pembridge’s Ann. * War. Bps., p. 289.
Tr. Th., p. 493. °fa., p. 495. °% Visitation Book.

screen."— Ulster Inguis. The shrine of St. Columba was executed at a very early
period, by Coula, the Artificer, and was preserved in Ard-M‘Giollagan down to
the sixteenth century. It was considered one of the most exquisite and elaborate
specimens of the artistic skill of the early Irish school. O’Donnel, in his Life nf
St. Columba, thus speaks of this precious shrine: ‘‘ Illud scrinium, quod usque in
hunc diem, tanquam nobilissimus thesaurus et unum ex praecipuis Sacrae Insulae
sacris monumentis in summa veneratione habetur, et asservatur in Ard-Miegiolla-
gan, quae est maritima portio regionis de Kilnnacta Glunne-Gemhin in Septemtri-
onali parte Ultoniae. Scrinium autem illud longe ante adventum S. Columbae ad
illa loca, et ut traditio est, vivente adhuc S. Patricio, elaborari coeptum est in
loco Dun-Cruithne priscis appellato, Fabro qui nobile et valde artificiosum opus
inchoavit, nomen erat Con/a cognomentum Artifex ; ex sua nimirum excellentia in
ea professione inditum.”— Trias Thaum. page 405.

16 See note 4, at Camus, page 161.

‘7St. Fionnlugh, patron of this church, is thus noticed in the Martyrology of
Donegal, at 3rd January: ‘‘Fionnlugh of Tamlacht- -—Fionnlogha in Cianacht of
Glen-giyen.” Colgan tells us that he was the son of Deman, and the brother of
St. Fintan, of Dumblesc, and that he made Scotland the field of his missionary
labours : ‘in peregrinationem exiit in Albionem."—Actfa SS., page 12. He was
probably the monk Find/uganus, who, according to Adamnan, interposed i in the
island of Hinba to save St. Columba’s life.—Vit. S. Col. ii, 24.”

