--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-206.png ---
178 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

at Asseroe, on the river Erne; he was also entitled to the
second draught of every one fishing there when they began
to fish, also to have a boat to take salmon and other fish
from the island to the sea, value yearly 3s. 4d., the rectory
of Tyreragh, extended from the abbey lands to the moun-
tain of Barnsmore, being the third part of all the tithes
(salmon excepted, which did belong to the bishop), which
rectory is valued at thirty shillings sterling ; the abbot and
convent had three parts of all the tithes of the quarter of
Callamurry, Cashill, Moyntir, Dooyne, five ballyboes of
Carroshee, the quarter of Carroshee, six ballyboes of Bally-
mayard, and the quarter of Kildony and Kilbanyn, which
were worth, besides the stipends of the curates, £11 35. 8d.
sterling.”

Bailemegrabhartaich ; This church, in Inisoen and diocess
of Derry, was founded by St. Columb ;* and another monas-
tery of the same name was founded by the same Saint in
Tir-zedha,* in the diocess of Raphoe, where the celebrated
relique of St. Columb, called Cathach, was said to have been
preserved."

These monasteries are now unknown.

Bally Mac Swiney; Near Castle Doe, in the barony of
Kilmacrenan.

A monastery was founded here by M‘Swiney, for friars
of the order of St. Francis.”

A few remains of this building are yet extant.*

Bellaghan ,* Near Lifford; there was a Franciscan friary
here,’ but we cannot find any particular account of it.

* King, p. 403. * Tr. Th., p. 495. * The Barony of Tyrhugh. %Tr. Th.,
2. 495. ~ War. Mon. * Pocockes Fournal, ¥ War. Mon. and Allemande.

* Bellaghan.—This, no doubt, is the present Ballaghan about a mile from
Manorcunningham, a small town in the heart of a rich and extensive territory
called the Lagan, lying between Letterkenny and Derry. The Lagan—literally
low country—is the identical Afoy-/tha, where /th, who led the first Milesian
invasion into Ireland, was met, defeated, and slain by the Tuatha-De-Danaans. It
was on this plain also, according to the Four Masters, was gained Tyrconnell’s
most complete victory over Tyrone. The battle is described at great length in
the Annals un‘ler 4.D. 1557, and may be read there with much interest. The
Tyrconnellian Chief, who inflicted this crushing defeat on Tyrone, was Calvagh
O’Donnell, the same who rose in red rebellion against his father, Manus
O’Donnell, the distinguished author of the Irish Life of St. Colum-Cille. The
unnatural Calvagh, aided by a body of Scottish auxiliaries, took the field against
his father, made him prisoner, and confined him in one of his castles. Shane
O'Neill, surnamed the Proud, thought this a favourable opportunity for humbling
Tyrconnell, and accordingly crossed the Foyle in great force. The ill-used
father quenched all vengeful feeling in his breast, and from his lonely prison sent
a message of affection to his ungrateful son. He counselled him strongly to
oppose the invader by stratagem, and not in a pitched battle. The stratagem
succeeded, for one night when O'Neill lay encamped at Ballaghan, Calvagh
stealthily approached, entered the camp without resistance, and slaughtered all

