--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-122.png ---
98 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

high road to Bandon; Cormac M‘Carthy, the son of Teige,
surnamed Laidir, about the year 1450, founded an abbey
here for nuns following the rule of St. Augustin ;* though
others say it was founded for friars. Part of the walls of
the building still remain." .

“Inquisition 12th January, XXXIII. Elizabeth, finds that
this religious fouridation, with a carucate of land called Balle-
macydane, and half a carucate called Ballelikye, adjoining the
said monastery, were of the annual value, besides reprises, of
10s. gd. Irish money.”

“ Inquisition 7th*March, XXVII. Elizabeth, finds that the
abbey of Ballyvaggadan, in Barret’s country, containing two
carucates of land, was in the possession of Cormac MacDerby,
and of the annual value, beside reprises, of 10s. Irish money.”

Ballynoe; in the barony of Kilnataloon, and two miles south
of Knockmourne ; there are large ruins of an ancient building
here, said to have been a religious house.”®

Ballyvourney,*® or the Town of the Beloved; is a small
village six miles west of Macroomp, in the barony of Muskerry.

St. Abban, who lived to a very great age, and died A.D.
650, built a nunnery at Burneach, in Muscragiamitin, and
presented it to St. Gobnata, who was descended from Conor
the Great, monarch of Ireland; her patron day is February
14th ;¥ the church, which is dedicated to her, is 104 feet in
length and 24 in breadth, and the steeple seems nodding
to its fall?

Bantry,” a decayed town on the bay of that name, which

* Smith, vol, 1, p. 179, and Map. * War. Mon. “Smith supr. © Smith, vol. 1,
pb. 161. *Zs also called Husneagh and Borneagh. ¥ Act. SS. pp. 315,622. * Smith,
vol. 1, ~. 193. *Was called anciently Ballygobbin,

and with their appurtenances belonged thereto, and were of the annual value of
35. 4d., and that Felemy Mac Owen, and other friars of the Order of St. Francis,
were in possession thereof, and that the tithes of the said lands belonged to the
rectory of Iniskynie in this county.”

5 Ballynoe.—This is probably represented by the large ruin to be seen a little to
the south-east of the village of Ballynoe, supposed to have been the ruins of a
religious house founded by Knights Hospitallers, to whom the place anciently be-
longed. This place is also called Knockmoume.

° Ballyvourncy.—Of the conventual church of Ballyvourney, some very extensive
and interesting ruins still remain. In one of the walls is a head carved in stone
which is regarded with much veneration. Near this is a holy well much resorted
to on the 11th of February, the festival of St. Gobnata, the patroness, and also
on Whit Monday, and near the well is a large stone with a circular basin or font,
rudely excavated, the water from which is held sacred.—See ‘‘Smith’s History
of Cork,” vol. i., p. 185.

7 Bantry.—According to the “ Annalsof the Four Masters,” the monastery of Bantry
was built by O’Sullivan in the year A.D. 1320. The MS. History of the Franciscan
Order in Ireland adds: ‘‘ The building of the Convent of Bantry, in the diocese
of Ross, was begun about the year 1320, and it was reformed by Father David
Afarly in the year 1432. When persecution arose it was seized on by the English
in the year 1508,.two of the friars being killed, and the rest obliged to fly for their

