--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-263.png ---
County of Down. 231

1170. Gilda Domongart, the son of Corbmac, was abbot.‘

1179. The abbot Maurice was a subscribing witness to a
gharter granted by Sir John de Courcey to the abbey of Ned-
drum.°

About the close of this century, Christian, bishop of Man,
was interred here.*

1207, and 1216, E———— was abbot between these years.f

4 Act. SS., p.651. * Monast. Angi., vol. 2, p. 1023.' King, p.67. © Annal. Mann.

It was of the death of the same Maenach, son of Siadhal, and of Domhnall (a
Prince of the Southern Hy Niall) was said :—

“ The fifth year, disastrous, sweet,
From Filan, of Tara,a Company have died ;
Maenach of happy Congall’s city,
Domhnal was slain by Donnchadh donn,
Great grief is Maenach, oh, dear God !
The illustrious black-haired man of the charming face,
The paragon of Ireland between the seas,
The successor of the mild Comgall,
Head of council of the just province,
The golden crown to be sorrowfully regretted ;
Grievous to me that the wise man of Inis-Fail
Died from the assembly of the brave Gaeidhil.
A gem of the full precious stone,
As far as noble Rome it is a sign of sorrow,
That Maenach, of noble Munster, does not live,
‘Tis sufficient cause of grief, oh, great God.”

A.D. “926. Celedabhail, son of Scannal, went to Rome on his pilgrimage from
the abbacy of Bangor, and he composed these quatrains at his departure :—

“*Time for me to prepare to pass from the shelter of a habitation,
To journey, as a pilgrim, over the surface of the noble lively sea;
Time to depart from the snareg of the flesh, with all its guilt,
Time now to ruminate how I may find the great Son of Mary.
Time to seek virtue, to trample on the will with sorrow,
Time to reject vice, and to renounce the demon;
Time to reproach the body, for of its crime it is putrid,
Time to rest after we have reached the place wherein we may shed our tears ;
Time to talk of the last day, to separate from familiar faces,
Time to dread the terrors of the tumults of the Day of Judgment ;
Time to defy the clayey body, to reduce it to religiaus rule,
Time to barter the transitory things for the country of the King of heaven;
Time to defy the ease of the little earthly world of a hundred pleasures,
Time to work at prayer, in adoration of the high King of Angels ;
But only a part of one year is wanting of my three score,
To remain under holy rule in one place it is time ;
Those of my own age are not living, who were given to ardent devotions,
To desist from the course of great folly in one place it is time;
It was grievous that Cormack the Hospitable was wounded with long lances,®
Indreachtach the noble, Muireadhae, Maenach, the great Maelmthigh.’ ”

It would seem that this poet-abbot of Bangor, before he had arrived at that
dignity, was confessor and spiritual adviser of the monarch, Niall Glundubh (Niall

* It is stated in an interlined gloss that this was Cormac MacCuileanan who
perished in the battle of Ballaghmore, near the town of Carlow, A.D. 903. In-
+ dreachtach and Maenach were abbots of Bangor.

