--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-284.png ---
252 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

Lanne, Karenlatheri, Feod, Balimagereg,, Karenesche, Chal-
lenimien, Rathoop, and the churches of Killecleth, Brichter,
and Stethian, in Dalibinu, Latrath, Donenath, and Kellagki-
nere ; reserving to the bishop the moiety of the oblations made
on the several feasts of the Nativity, the Purification, St.
Patrick, Easterday, and Whitsunday. Witnesses, L. Arch-
bishop of Dublin; T. Armagh, and many others.!

* Mon. Angl., vol. 2, p. 1020.

course of the inferior clergy and laity. It may seem strange that the ‘‘ Annals of
the Four Masters” record, at the year 1293, ‘‘It was revealed to Nicholas Mac-
Maelisa, Coarb of Patrick (Primate), that the relics of Patrick, Columbkille, and
Bridgid, were at Saul. They were taken up by him, and great virtues and miracles
were afterwards wrought by means of them ; and after having been honourably
covered, they were deposited in a shrine.” We are inclined to believe that the Saul
referred to in this entry is the Church called Saul at Armagh. It obviously refers
to a portion of the relics which had been given to some church, and most likely
that portion which we know the Church of Armagh was long possessed of.

A Patent Roll (41 Ed. III.) preserved in the Tower of London, contains copies
of charters to St. Patrick's, of Down—one from Malachy, the Bishop, and six from
De Courcy. In one he granted to this abbey the ferry of the Lough of Strangford,
towards the Dufferin ; the ferry of Carlingford, that of Carrickfergus, that of the
Bann, and all the ferries in his several conquests, except that between Lecale and
Ards. This grant he made for the good of the souls of his father, mother, prede-
cessors, and his niece, Beatrice de Villiers; for that of his own, of Africa, his wife,
and of all who died in his service, or who should die in it. The witnesses to this
charter were M., Bishop of Down; R., Bishop of Connor; E., Abbot of Ynes
(Inch) ; G., Abbot of Holm ; P., Abbot of Saul; G., Prior of St. Thomas; P.,
Prior of Muckamor ; W., Prior of Carrickfergus. In another charter he granted.
the tithe of all cattle whatsoever he had on his lands, and of all his fisheries.
Witness, Will., Prior of Carrickfergus. In another he granted power to hold a
court and some other privileges, and appointed D—— to be prior. In another
charter he confirmed the donation made by Amuric de Hanehhe (probably now
modernised into Hanna), of the land of Ballcrou. Witness, Malachy, Bishop of
Down, Malachy, the third bishop of that name who presided over the See of
Down, after witnessing the ruin of his country and the spoliation of the native clergy
of his diocese to enrich English ecclesiastics who had come in the train of the con-
querors, died about the year 1201; and ‘The Annals of the Four Masters,” at the
year 1204, record, evidently with satisfaction, that ‘‘ John de Courcy, the plunderer
of churches and territories, was driven by the son of Hugh de Lacy into Tyrone to
scek the protection of the Kinel-Owen. He arrived at Carrickfergus, and the
English of Ulidia slew great numbers of his people.” It appears that De Courcy
had incurred the displeasure of King John by speaking too freely of the murder of
Prince Arthur, and Hugh de Lacy, the justiciary, was ordered to arrest him. The
Popular tradition of Downpatrick, and a romantic story told in the ‘‘ Book of
Howth,” now preserved in the Lambeth Library, relate that De Lacy proclaimed
De Courcy a rebel, and bribed his servants to betray him. These traitors informed
De Lacy that their master was a man of such gigantic strength, and always well
armed, that no one durst lay hands upon him ; however, that upon Good Friday of
each year he wore no arms, but remained alone doing penance in the graveyard of
Down, when he could be seized. This suggestion was followed, and De Courcy
was attacked unarmed. Seeing no other weapon at hand, he ran to a wooden cross
that stood in the churchyard, and tearing its shaft from the socket, he killed thirteen
of his assailants upon the spot. He was, however, finally overpowered, and deli-
vered into the hands of De Lacy, who conveyed him a prisoner to the Tower of
London. De Lacy inherited his possessions, with the title of Earl of Ulster, as a
mark of Royal approbation, but, instead of rewarding the betrayers, he caused
them to be hanged.

