--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-107.png ---
County of Clare. 87

Munster tell us, that Morogh O’Brien burnt the abbey of
Kilfenora,’® and slew many people therein, A.D. 1055.

Killaloe;* the seat of a bishop, and situated on the
western banks of the river Shannon, near the noted cataragt.
St. Molualobhair, the grandson of Eocha Bailldearg, King of
North Munster, founded an abbey here about the beginning
of the 6th century.! He was succeeded by his disciple St.
Flannan, who about the year 639 was consecrated bishop of
the place; from this time we hear no more of it as an
abbey#

1 Killaloe was anciently the resort of many pilgrims.

*Was called anciently Kildalua. ‘Collectan. vol. 1, p. 439. *%War. Bish. p. §90.

the distance of 14 feet from the west gable, 6 feet 4 inches high, and 3
feet 6 inches wide, built up in front, with well cut stones, and having a holy
water font inserted iri the wall on the right hand side as one goes in. Six feet
3 inches from the east gable, in the same side, is a pointed window, 7 feet high
and 3 feet wide, inside, q feet from the ground outside where it measures 4¢ feet
in height, and 6} inches in breadth at top, and 7} inches at bottom, having its
sides perforated for iron bars. There is a pointed window in the east gable,
measuring 6 feet 9 inches in height on the inside, and 3 feet in breadth, and 4 feet
10 inches in height, and 7 inches in breadth on the outside. The sides perforated
for the reception of iron bars. The walls are built for the most part of, long thin
quarry stones.—Ordnance Survey of Clare, vol. 1, pp. 331-4.

8 This was the cathedral church of the ancient episcopal city of Kilfenora, dedi-
cated to St. Fechen, patron of the diocese. It was situated about four and a half
miles north-north-east from the town of Ennistymon, in the barony of Corcomroe.
This ancient church is now represented by the Protestant church of Kilfenora, and
the seven stone crosses that marked the sanctuary of the cathedral have all disap-
peared but two, and it appears hopeless to seek their history. One of them, how-
ever, may be still seen on the demesne of Clansford, at Killaloe. It was removed
thither in the year 1821 by the Right Rev. Dr. Mant, Protestant bishop of the
united dioceses of Killaloe and Kilfenora, and placed in the beautiful demesne of
Clansford, with a Latin inscription indicating its history :—

Quam spectas crucem,
In agro Fenaborensi vetustate collapsam,
Ne penitus ee ‘situque abolesceret
i

ic
Apud sedem Laonensem
Erigi curavit
Antiquitatis Ecclesiasticae studiosus
R. M.S. T. P.
Utriusque Dioceseos Episcopus.
A.D. MDCCCXXI.
A few yards west of Kilfenora was Kilcarragh, a monastery or hospital endowed
with one quarter of land; the site is marked on the Ordnance Map of Clare,
sheet 16.

19The following notice of the parish of Killaloe is found in the Ordnance Survey
of Clare, vol ii. p. 339-

“« This parish is bounded on the north by the parishes of O'Gonnello and Kilno ;
on the west by that of Killokennedy ; on the south by Kiltennaanlea, and on the
east by the Shannon, which separates it from the county of Tipperary.

‘« The name of this parish is in all the ancient Irish authorities written Ci// da lua
which means the church of St. Da/ua, Molua or Luanus, a famous saint who flourished
towards the egd of the sixth century. Ledwich, indeed, contends that Cid/ /o /ua is the
true name, and that it means the church upon or near the water, In this, however, he

