--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-242.png ---
210 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

953. Died Angus M‘Loingsy, archdeacon of this abbey.

1098. Died the abbot Haitheartagh M‘Tiarny.c*

Movill is now a parish church in the diocess of Derry.?

Magheribeg ; or the Little Plain, near the town of Donegall.
A monastery was founded here by O’Donnell, about the middle
of the fifteenth century,® for friars of the third order of St.
Francis.

Malin ; on the sea-side in Inisoen; here we find a very
ancient church, which is said to have been a monastery.&

Muckish ; appears, in the map, to be four miles and a half
from Castle Doe, in the barony of Kilmacrenan; yet bishop
Pococke observes, that when he visited that country he could
not hear of such an abbey.

Raphoe ;* a small town which gives name to the barony.
St Columb founded an extensive monastery at Rathboth, and

Ann. Four Masters. °° Id. “Liber Visit, ° Allemande, ‘War. Mon.
§ Pococke’s Journal.

for a time over a boggy valley, you ascend into a dreary and mountainous
tract, extremely ugly in itself, but from which you have a fine view indeed of the
greatest part of the upper lake of Lough Erne, with its many elevated islands,
and all its hilly shores. . I had at length, after
travelling about three miles, arrived where the road is discontinued, and, by
the direction of my guide, ascended a mountain path, that brought me through a
wretched village, and led to the top ofa hill. Here my boy (guide) left me, and
went to look for the man who was to ferry us to Purgatory, and on the ridge
where I stood I had leisure to look around. To the south-west lay Lough Emme,
with all its isles and cultivated shores ; to the north-west Lough Derg, and truly,
never did 1 mark such a contrast. Lough Derg under my feet; the lake,
the shore, the mountains, the accompaniments of all sorts presented the very
landscape of desolation—its waters expanding in highland solitude, amidst a wide
waste of moors, without one green spot to refresh the eye, without a house or
tree, all mourntul in the brown hue of its far-stretching bogs, and the grey
uniformity of its rocks ; the surrounding mountains even partook of the sombre
character of the place ; their forms without grandeur, their ranges continuous and
without elevation. The lake was certainly as fine as rocky shores and numerous
islands could make it, but it was encompassed with such dreariness . . o

I said to myself ‘1 am already in Purgatory.’ A person-who had never seen the
picture that was under my eye, who had read of a place consecrated to the
devotion of ages, might imagine that St. Patrick’s Purgatory, secluded in its
sacred island, would have all the venerable and Gothic accompaniments of olden
time, and its ivied towers and belfried steeples, its carved windows and cloistered
arches, its long, dark aisles and fretted vaults, would have risen out of the water,
rivalling Iona or Lindesfarne ; but nothing of the sort was to be seen ; the island
about half a mile from shore presented nothing but a collection of hideous slated
houses and cabins,” True, its ancient glory has fled from Lough Derg. Its fine
monastic buildings, its church with carved windows and noble arches, its cells,
and its cave have been demolished, but the spirit of persecution which effected
this work of destruction, served only to stimulate Catholic piety, and St. Patrick's
Purgatory is now as frequented by Penitents as in the days of St. Dabheog.

19 Raphoe, otherwise Rath-Both (the rath of the cottages) has also lost its
ancient glory. The hand of the destroyer fell heavily upon it, and all that
remains of its ecclesiastical greatness is a portion of the old cathedral incorporated
with the present one. The famous monastery built here by St. Columbkille, and
subsequently enlarged by St. Adamnan, has been levelled to the ground, and its
site is hardly known at present; the town itself, which was once so important as

