--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-189.png ---
County of Derry. : 163

Inquisition 12th November, 1st King James, finds that
John O’Boyll was the last prior, and Ist February, 32nd King
Henry VIII., he was seized of the said priory, and also of four
townlands ahd a half townland, viz., Balleneigfeigh and Att-
woare, Arbeggan, Dunaville and Balliosallye ; also a townland
‘and a-half called Tollo-Cor, in temporals only ; also the fishery
of the river Bann, on the Monday after the Feast of the
Nativity of Saint John the Baptist, in every year, of which the
said prior was seized time immemorial ; and one salmon daily,
during the season, from every fisher in the said river. The
prior surrendered the same Ist January, 34th of same King,
the said lands and fishery, besides reprises, being valued
at 40s.—Chief Rem.

Priory of Canons Regular; St. Carbreus, or Corpreus, a dis-
ciple of St. Finian of Clonard, was the first bishop of Cole-
raine, and flourished about the year 540;" his festival is
celebrated the 11th of November ;* he was succeeded by St.
Conall, who was bishop in the time of St. Columb, the cele-
brated founder of the abbey of Derry, A.D. 546.* Ardmedius,
or Armedacius, abbot of Coleraine, was put to death by the
Danes in 930 Manus M‘Dunleve, in 1171, plundered this
and several other churches, but we are told that he soon after
met with the fate he so justly merited.* Thomas M‘Uchtry

* Act. SS., p. 313,406. Tr. Th. p. 183, 380.  Vard., p. 158. * Tr. Th.,
p. 380. ¥ Act. SS., p. 107. * Annal. Munst.

the monastery soon after the Synod of Dromcheatt (circa an. §90), was joyously
welcomed by St. Conall, the people of the surrounding district of Eilne offering
innumerable gifts (collectis a populo campi Eilne pene innumerabilibus xeniis), and
assembling in the cloister (1 A/atea monasterii strata) to receive his blessing. —
(Vit. S. Col. i., 50). Besides Airmedhach, abbot of Cuil-rathain, slain by the
Danes in the year 930, who is mentioned in the text, we find, in theannals of the Four
Masters, the following entries regarding the heads of this monastery :—‘t An. 972,
Roitectach, superior of Cuil-Kathain, anchorite and wise man, died ;” ‘‘ an. 988,
Mac Leiginn O’Mureadhain, superior of Cuil-rathaindied ;” ‘‘an. 1110, Cernach,
son of Mac Ulcha, superior of Cuil-rathain, died;” “an. 1122, Andadh, son of
Mac Ulcha, superior of Cuil-rathain, died.” St. Bernard also narrates how St.
Malachy O’Morgair visited, on a certain occasion, this monastery, which is called
Civitas Culratim. It was probably in 1213, when the houses of the town and its
ecclesiastical buildings were pulled down by the English of Ulidia, to furnish ma-
terials for the castle of Thomas Mac Uchtry, that the ancient abbey of Coleraine
was demolished. Not a vestige of it now remains, but it is supposed to have occu-
pied the site of the present shambles beside the river. The church attached to the
monastery seems to have been spared on that occasion, and it appears in after times
under the title of S¢. Patrick's. When the possessions of O’Cahan were made shire
ground in the reign of Elizabeth, Coleraine gave name to the county now known as
Derry, and it was so called till the year 1613, when this district, being granted by
the crown toa number of London merchants who were incorporated under the
name of ‘‘ the Irish Society,” was called the county of Londonderry. This so-called
Irish Society was bound to build the town of Coleraine, to people it, to enclose it
with a wall, and to establish a market, within seven years from the date of the
charter, by which were granted to the London merchants the entire abbey of St.
Mary, its site, and the lands belonging to it, together with the old town and all its
appurtenances,

