--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-248.png ---
216 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

Taughboyne ; St. Baithen, the son of Brendan, a disciple and
‘kinsman of St. Columb, and his successor in the abbey of Hy,

the sublimest and most awful aspects of nature. A place so favourable to prayer
and retirement could not fail to attract the notice of St. Columba ; he chose it for
the situation of one of his principal monasteries, and made it his favourite retreat
when he visited his native mountains. It appears his first visit to this glen was
suggested by an angel who, appearing to him on one occasion, told him to pro-
ceed to the solitude of Seangleann, expel the evil spirits who established them-
selves there, and consecrate it to God. Manus O’Donnell, the Saint’s biographer
and kinsman, relates this fact, and adds, in very beautiful narrative, the circum-
stances which attended the visit made by St. Columba in obedience to this Divine
command. He begins by a description of the Seangleann :—‘‘It is,” he writes,
“‘the extreme western portion of the sovereignty of Tirconnell; it stretches into
the ocean, and terminates in rugged mountains and cliffs, which hang high
over the boiling sea, and was then notorious for being a stronghold of evil-spirits.
They came there from Cruachan Oigli (Croagh Patrick, on the Connaught coast
directly opposite), whence they had been expelled by St. Patrick. Having estab-
lished themselves in the Seangleann, they remained there until the time of St.
Columba, covering it with a black cloud, dense and impenetrable to human
sight, and making the boundary river impassable by infecting its water with a
poisonous stench. In obedience to the angel’s admonition, Columba set out for
this place, accompanied by a numerous retinue of holy men, and having
penetrated to the bank of the poisoned river, one of the evil spirits hurled a
heavy pole from the opposite bank, which struck one of the Saint’s com-
anions, called Cearc, and killed him on the spot. Columba, inflamed with
oly indignation at such a daring act of the demon, flung back the pole,
chasing away the thick darkness and the devils in its course, until it fell
on a spot where it struck its roots into the soil, and turned into a fine holly
tree, which continues to flourish even to the present day. After this the Saint
blessed the river, and having crossed it, he was met by the angel, who handed
him a large blue stone, with angles upon it, and told him to cast it into the
Egyptian darkness before him. He did so, when lo! the sun shot its bright
beams into the gloom, and the evil spirits were seen crowding on a precipitous
cliff impending over the sea. Again St. Columba, by the angel's direction,
wielded the stone, and his own bell called dubs Duaibseach, and hurling them at
the crowd of infernal spirits, bade them in the name of Christ to precipitate them-
selves into the sea, and injure no one for the future. At the Saint’s command,
and his invocation of the sacred name, a violent shock was felt in the mountain, a
chasm was opened in the cliff, and through it the evil spirits disappeared into the
sea. After this the Saint prayed for the recovery of the stone and the bell, and
directly he perceived both bore through the air and falling at his feet. By
the great force of the fall the bell lost its tongue, and sank many fet deep
into the earth. The bell and stone are carefully preserved, and regarded wit!
deep veneration in this district, which the Saint blessed, and ordained that
it should henceforth possess immunity from secular power. With the stone
many miracles were afterwards performed, and the tongueless bell lies still
buried in the hole which it made in its fall, and will remain there to avenge
any and every violation of the immunity of the place.” Such is the curious
narrative of St. Columbkille’s first visit to the Seangleann, and some of the
incidents mentioned in it are recorded in enduring memorials, which are
pointed out to this day. For instance, the grave of Cearc, one of the Saint’s
companions who was crushed by the pole hurled across the river by the evil
spirit, is shown on the Kilcar side of the Glen river, and the townland in
which it is situated is called Stranakirke. The cleft in the precipice through
which the demons disappeared into the sea, and the hole in which the bell lies
buried are pointed out too, but the tongue of the bell is said to have been found
only a few years since by a farmer in the neighbourhood, and to have been sacri-
legiously converted into nails in a neighbouring forge. In the same biography
O'Donnell informs us that long before St. Columbkille’s birth, and the introduction
of Christianity into Ireland, Finn, the son of Cubhal, and the most celebrated

