--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-097.png ---
County of Clare. 77

January 19th, 1620, and again in fee to Henry, Earl of
Thomond, September tst, 1661."

Inchmore; an island in Loughrea in the river Shannon.

St. Senan, the great Saint of Iniscathy, built an abbey at
Inismor, and placed St. Liberius, one of his disciples, over it.*
His memory is still celebrated in the island.‘

Inisanlaot." Turlogh, son of Teige Caoluisge, son of
Conor na Suidaine O’Brien, King of Thomond, ‘built a
magnificent abbey here, in which he was buried in the year

1305."

Iniscunla, in Hy Sedna, an ancient territory in this
county; St. Senan built a church here, and placed over it
the Saints Finan and Finnen.”

This church is now unknown.

Iniskeltair;* an island in Loughderg, in the rivet Shannon,
and on the borders of the counties of Clare and Galway.

FRolls. *Act. SS. p. 539. ‘War. Mon. “Annal. Inisfal. “Act. SS. p. §34-

"In the Ordnance Survey Papers in the Royal Irish Academy, Inisanlaoi is
identified as the place now called Ennis, It was also called Jnis Cluain-Ramh-
fota, i. ¢., the lawn, meadow, or insulated holm of the long rowing, now Clonroad,
a townland on the river Fergus, in the parish of Drumcliff, adjoining the town of
Ennis.”—See ‘* Annals of the Four Masters,” A.D. 1408, note x.

There is good reason, however, to think, that these were formerly two distinct
places, namely, Inis-an-laoi, the island where the town of Ennis now stands, and
Inis Cluain Ramh-foda, or the island holm of Clonroad, and that each was a
fortified town or residence. We lear this from the following entries in the ‘‘ An-
nals of Innisfallen ”: —

“ A.D. 1284. The castle of Ennis was built by Torlagh Mac Taige Caoluisge
[O'Brien], and it was he that made the first building of stone-work in Mur-Jnse
(wall or fortification) on the west side.”

“A.D. 1284. Torlagh More O’Brien, with a great hosting about him, came to
attack Torlough, son of Brian Roe O'Brien, to his house, or Fort, at Ennis, and
they are the town and brought a great prey and booty out of it to Cluain-
Ramh-foda (Clonroad), and expelled Torlogh Oge, son of Bryan Ruadh, out
of the country.”

“ 1306. Turlagh, son of Teige Caoluisge, son of Conor na Suidane O’Brien,
died, and was buried in the monastery which himself built and whitewashed with
lime at Inse-an Laoighe.”

We learn from the Cathreim Thoirdhealbhaig, or wars of Turlough O’Brien,
that Donough Cairbreach O'Brien was the first who erected a fortress of earth
at this place, According to tradition he had also a stone castle here which stood
near the bridge of Clonroad, and this seems to be confirmed by a passage in these
Annals at the year 1553, where it is stated that Donnell and Turlough O'Brien
made a nocturnal incursion into Cluain-Ramh-fohda (now Clonroad), against
their brother, Donough More, and burned that town, and slew many persons ;
and that Donough went into a tower which was in the town to defend himself.”—
“Annals of the Four Masters,” A.D. 1408, #. x. For further notes of the
monastery of Jnis an lacigh, see Ennis.

41 Inis Caelltrach (the Island of the Churches), so called from the great number
of churches and religious houses situated in it. This island was celebrated as a
spot of considerable sanctity, and resorted to as a place of pilgrimage by the
faithful ; hence it was called Holy Island, and is still known by that name. The
island is situated in the river Shannon, above the tidal put of the river, and
near the town of Scariff, which commands a view of Loch Dearg. It contains
about twenty acres of land, and still preserves the remains of seven churches

