--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-153.png ---
County of Cork. 127

St. Peter's; The same inquisition finds, that there was a
chantry in this church ; to which, contrary to the statute of
mortmain, two messuages and a garden, annual value, besides
reprises, 6s. 8a., were granted by Robert Golde, for the purpose
of finding one priest to say mass.

Cregan, see Timoleague.

Cullen ; In the barony of Duhallow, and five miles and an
half south-west of Kanturk ; near this church are some ruins
which are said to have been an ancient nunnery.™

Donaghmore ; In the barony of Muskerry, and six miles
north-east of Macroomp. St. Fingene, a disciple of St.
Finbarr, was abbot of Domnach mor mitine® which, in after
ages, became a parish church, and is now called Donaghmore.

Fermay ,™ A small village on the river Blackwater, in the

™ Smith, vol. 1, p. 302. ® Act. SS. p. 258.

™ Fermoy ; The monastery of Fermoy was the head of the great religious institu-
tions founded by St. Finnchua in the beginning of the seventh century. This saint
received the waters of baptism from St. Ailbhe, studied at Benchor under its holy ,
founder, St. Comghall, was subsequently abbot of that great monastery, but
resigned that office to establish the great religious school in his native territory at
Fermoy. He was remarkable for his penitential spirit, and, towards the close of
his saintly career, made a pilgrimage to Rome. e ancient name of the place
now called Fermoy was Magh Meine, and thus it was known till the siege of Dram
Damhghaire, which is recorded to have taken place about the year of our Lord 220.
Munster was at that time invaded by Cormac Mac Airt, who, full of confidence ig
his Druids and in the valour of his troops, encamped at Drom Damhghaire, in the
S.E. of the county Limerick, since called Cnoe Longa (Knocklong), #.¢. hill of the
encampment. In thisemergency a famous Druid, named Mogh Ruth, hastened from
his residence in Oilean Dairbre, now the Island of Valencia, to the aid of the
Munster army, and through his skill and bravery a brilliant victory was achieved.
The troops of the monarch, adds the ancient tale, were pursued by the men of
Munster, led by their Druid, Mogh Ruth, in his chariot drawn by wild oxen, till
driven beyond the borders of the province, and into Magh Raighne, in Ossory.
The men of Munster now returned home in triumph, after having repulsed the
invader, and called a convocation of the states and people of the pores to give
thanks to their friend and deliverer, Mogh Ruth, after which they unanimously
agreed to give and confirm to him and his descendants for ever the possession of
the plain and country then called Magh Meine (or the mineral plain) in reward for
his great services.

‘agh Meine was thus handed over to Mogh Ruth, and hence it was called Fearn
Moga, or the land of Muga, as written in some old MSS. __ His tribe and family,
who settled down in this territory, took the tribe name of Fer Mugai, #.¢., the men
of Mugai, anglicised Fermoy ; and the race of Mogh Ruth continue to inhabit
there even to this day, in the families of O’Dugan, O’Cronin, and others in that
and the neighbouring districts. The following extract from the MS. Book of
Lismore further illustrates its names :—

“*They then sent for the clay of Comlehaille Meic Con, é.c., the Caile (or land) of
Mene, son of Erc, son oY Deaghaidh, which is called Fir Mulghe, é.¢., Fermoy,
to-day. The reason it is called Caile Meic N-Eirc is because his sons dwelt there,
namely, Mene, son of Erc, and Uatha, son of Erc, and Ailbhe, son of Erc.
Another name for it was Fir Muighe Mene, so called because of the abusdance
of the minerals contained in the mountains around it, and because there are mine-
Tals in all the fields around it also. Another name for it was Corr Chaille Meic
Con, because it was the patrimony of the Clann Dairine, and it is in it Rossach-
na-Righ is, #.2., Ross-na-Righ, the ancient burial place of the kings of Munster,

