--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-166.png ---
140 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

county of Limerick, and was called the abbey of St. Mary of
Chore, or of the Chore of St. Benedict.*

Donald was abbot of this house, and was succeeded by
Robert, who governed the abbey A.D. 1309.”

1476. Gerald, bishop of Cloyne, appropriated several vicar-
ages to this abbey.”

26th July, 31st King Henry VIIL, the abbot was seized of
the abbey, dormitory, cloister, chapter-house, an hall, &c.,
within the precincts, containing one acre, annual value, besides
reprises, 5s. ; also one hundred and twenty-three acres of land
in the town of Chore, annual value, besides reprises, 56s. 8d. ;
a salmon-wier in the said town, annual value, besides reprises,
6s. 8d.; and a water-mill in the said town, annual value, be-
sides reprises, 20s. ; one hundred and twenty acres of land in
Kyllynnemaraghe and Ballygybban, annual value, besides
reprises, 40s, ; and the following rectories appropriated to the
said abbot: Chore, annual value, besides reprises, 100s. ;
Downbologge, annual value, besides reprises, 66s. 8¢.; Kylow-
ane, annual value, besides reprises, 66s. 8d. ; St. Catharine's,
annual value, besides reprises, 66s. 8¢.; and Mogyelle, annual
value, besides reprises, 20s., all sterling money. The said
lands, &c., lye and are situate in this county —Chief Rem.

17th September, 17th Queen Elizabeth, this abbey, with
two hundred and eighty acres in the town and lands of Chore,
one hundred and twenty acres in Kylnamanagh, Downe-mac-
more, and Rallygibbin ; a messuage and garden in Carrigch
; a parcel of land called Fearrin Edmondroae, ten
acres of land lying there, and five acres in Cnockacottige ; the
rectories of Chore, Donbolloge, St. Katherine near Cork, Kil-
rowan, Kilcollehy, and Moygelly, and the vicarage of Ballene-
chore, all belonging to the said abbey, were granted, in capite,
to John Fitzgerald and his heirs.—A ud. Gen.

Monanimy,; is seated on the river Blackwater, in the
barony of Fermoy, and about three miles below the town of
Mallow. In the King’s quit-rent books, the parishes or
rectories of Clenor, Carigdownen, Carig, and Templebodane,
with the rectory of Cloghan, are charged £3 10s. crown-rent,
as belonging to the commandery of Monanimy. No mention
is made by any of our writers of this commandery, but at
Monanimy we find an ancient castle, with the traces of several
large buildings round it.

Mourne ;> three miles south of Mallow, in the barony of
Barrets. In the reign of King John, Alexander de Sancta
Helena either founded this preceptory for Knights Templars,

» War. Mon. ¥ King, p. 376. * War. Bps., p. 563. “Smith, vol. 1, p. 349-
» Called also Mora and Ballynamona, and by the Irish, Monaster na mona.

