--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-087.png ---
County of Cavan. 67

yearly rent of three-pence ; a reversion of the same, together
with the hospitals of Dromlomman and Mounterconaght, with
other lands, was granted to him for 60 years, from the 23rd
of April, 1605.°

Cavan' is a market town and borough, sending members to
parliament, and gives name to the barony and county.

Monastery of the Virgin Mary ; was founded in the year
1300, by Giolla-Jiosa-Ruadh, (z.¢. the servant of Christ) O’Reilly,
dynast of Breffiny,? for friars of the order of St. Dominick ;4 but
the same sept of the O’Reillys, about the year 1393, expelled
the Dominicans, and gave the house to the conventual Fran-
ciscans.’ 1468, This monastery, together with Bally-Reilly,
O’Reilly’s mansion seat, was burnt by the English under the
Lord Dep. John Tiptoft, Earl of Worcester.* The friars of
the strict observance had reformed this monastery before the
year 1499; and provincial chapters of the order were held
here in the years 1521, 1539, and 1556.'

John, son of Cahal O’Reilly, reformed this friary in 1502.

Owen O'Neile, the famous general of the Irish army, dying
by poison, as some suppose, at Cloughoughter in this county,
November the 16th, 1649, was buried in this abbey ;¥ of which
there are not now the least remains.

Domnachmore ;? The festival of St. Ere of Domnachmore,
in Maglughat,* is celebrated on the 27th of October.** This
place is totally unknown.

Lodge, vol. 1., p.316. PThe ancient name of the County of Cavan. War. mon.
War. MSS., vol. 34. Harris tabl. "Burke, p. 281. ™Annal. Four Masters.
*War. MSS. vol. 34. Ud. “Annal Four Masters. “Carte, vol. 2., p. 83. *A ter.
ritory in this county. **Vard, p. 159.

1 The town of Cavan is situated in the ancient parish of Urney,and from a period
of remote antiquity was the seat of the O'Reillys. The name Urney points to
some great sanctuary which was frequented here, and the Franciscan Convent
which was known by the name A‘a-due, probably occupied the site of the ancient
sanctuary. It is from this town that the county Cavan derives its name. In an-
cient times, as appears from Ptolemy, this district was occupied by the Erdini,
in Irish, Zrnaighe ; and the river Erne, as also the lake £rze still retains the
memory of this early people. The present county of Cavan was subsequentl
known as East or Upper Breffny, and sometimes, too. from the name of its chief-
tains, was called Breffny-O’Reilly. In Latin it was generally styled Zriburna,
i.e. **Tir Briuin”, the land of the descendants of Bryan, King of Connaught.
It holds a prominent place in the various wars of Ireland, and on account of its
many natural fastnesses was one of the last districts of Ireland to lose the inde-
pendence of its native possessors. At the time of the suppression of the reli-
gious houses, eight abbeys and priories were returned from this county. Scarcely
a trace of their ruins can now be seen, and in some instances it is only conjecture
that points to their former sites.

2 Domnachmore—In the martyrology of Donegal, on the 27th of October, we
find the entry: ‘‘ Earc, Bishop of Domhnach—Mor Maighe-Luadhat, in the
north of Ui-Faelain. This may be Earc, bishop, son of Fergna, son of Folachta,
who is of the race of Braesal Breac, from whom the O’Traighi are descended.”
In the Martyrology of St. Aengus he is called ‘* Ere of Domhnach-mor Maincch,”
and the gloss adds: “4, ¢, in Magh Luadhat in the north of Uibh Faelan,”

