--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-275.png ---
County of Down. 243

Altocher, and Balleongonye ; also the grange of the Temple-
ne-leffine, in the county of Antrim, and all the tithes of three
townlands appertaining to the said grange, which lands were,
on said 5th November, in the tenure of Moyses Hill, Esq.;
also the grange of Kilwoodmaninghe, in the country of Slutte
Henrikeis, in the county of Down; and all the tithes of five
townlands appertaining to the said grange, lying in the said
Slutte Henrikeis, viz., Dennihenrye, Ballnullye, Ballehull,
Ballchalnegye and Ballasneburn ; annual value of the said
abbey, &c., besides reprises, 425.—Chicf Rememb.

Domnachmaghin *° St. Patrick founded this church in Mug-
dorna,® and placed St. Victor over it.°

Downpatrick ,*? lies on the south west branch of the Lough
of Strangford, and is a market and borough-town sending
burgesses to parliament.

» The barony of Mourne. ° Act. SS., p. 424. » Was known anciently by the
several names of Avaskeltair, Rathkeltair, Leathlaidhi, Leatkglaysse, and Dunda-
leathglasse.

° Domnachmaghin ; now Donagh Moyne, in the county of Monaghan.—See
Shirley's Dominion of Farney, p. 151, &c.

10 Downpatrick.— Abbey of Canons Regular, and afterwards of Benedictines.
The Mound or Rath of Downpatrick, lying to the north of the Cathedral,
‘*comprehends,” says Harris, “at least three-quarters of an English mile within
the circuit of all the works. The circumference of it is 2,100 feet ; the conical
height 60 feet ; the diameter at the top bearing a proportion to the other parts.
Three great artificial ramparts surround it, the most considerable of which is thirty
feet broad.” This great rath appears to have been the royal residence and prin-
cipal fortress of the princes who governed the surrounding territory, and it was
probably on that account that the church in its vicinity was selected as the place of
St. Patrick's sepulture and as the cathedral of the diocese. On this mound was
the residence of Celtchar of tke battles, who flourished about the commencement of
the Christian era, and was one of the heroes of the Red Branch, and one of the
twelve chiefs of Ulster. From him the fortress was called Aras Cealtair, “the
habitation of Celtchar,” Rath Chealtair, ‘the fort of Celtchar,” and Dun Celt.
chair, ‘‘the fortress of Celtchar.” Downpatrick, in more modern times, was known
by the names of Dun-leth-glas, or Druim-leth-glas, and eventually the name assumed
the form of Dun-da-leth-glas, which Colgan translates ‘‘the fort of the two halves
of the chain ;” and this name is accounted for by a legend related by Jocelyn, that
King Laoghaire, being enraged against Dichu for becoming a Christian, had
ordered that the sons of Dichu, who were hostages with him, should be allowed
to perish of thirst ; but an angel freed them from their prison house, and, in the
words of Jocelin, “he left one of them in a place in Down, where is now erected the
Church of St. Patrick, and the other on a neighbouring hill (the Mound), sur-
rounded by a marsh of the sea; and he broke asunder the chains wherewith they
were bound ; and each place is, even to this day, from the broken chains, called
Dun-da-leath-glas.” It would seem, however, to have borne that name four
hundred years before the time of St. Patrick ; for, in an old story preserved in the
Book of Leinster, Celtchar is said to be ‘‘of Leth-glais.” In process of time the
name was abbreviated to Dun, from which the Latin name Dunum, and modern
one Down, or, with the addition of the name of the patron saint, Downpatrick,
have been formed.

We may presume that the conversion of the princes who ruled Ulidia induced St.
Patrick at an early period of his mission to erect a church in the vicinity of their
chief fortress, and we find that the ancient lives of the saint represent Rus, son of
Trichem, and brother of Dichu, as presiding over the church of Dundalethglas.

