--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-327.png ---
County of Down. ; 289

Newtown ;* in the barony of Ardes, is a market and a
borough ; Walter de Burgh, Earl of Ulster, founded a monas-
tery here in honour of St. Columb,™ for Dominican friars,
A.D. 1244.7

1298 and 1312. Provincial chapters of the order were held
here.®

Patrick O’Doran, the last prior, voluntarily surrendered the
priory Ist of February, 32nd King Henry VIII., being then
seized of the same, and of the townlands of Newtown, Kil-
cowmon, and Bearnes, all in this county; annual value
135. 3a?

There are some remains of this monastery still to be
seen.4 .

Saul ;* In the barony of Lecale. St. Patrick founded an
abbey here for Canons Regular, and made his disciple, St.
Dunnius, or Modunn, abbot of it; the patron day is the 29th

™ Bourke, p. 242. ™Zd. Ann. Dom. de Trim. King, 87. ° War. Mon.
» Chief Rememb. % Bp. Pococke's Journal. * Called in Latin Saballum, in Irish
Sgibolphadraig, i.e, Patrick's Barn.

87 Newtown.--Newtownards priory was frequently called Villa Nova. To it
was appropriated the rectory of Newtown, valued in the Taxation of Pope
Nicholas at 14 Marks.

The priory chapel was converted intoa Protestant church by thé first Lord Mont-
gomery. It afterwards was used for a courthouse, but it is now abandoned to
ruin. The Dominicans, after they were forced to abandon Newtownards, found
a “ Locus Refugii” in the townland of Burren, in the parish of Kilcoo, but at a
somewhat later period the Dominicans of Burren moved off to the neighbouring
townland of Moneyscalp, where they occupied a cabin, the site of which is to this
day shown in the garden of Widow Mullan, who pointed out tothe writer the stone
that was their door-step and the stone that served them for an altar when their con-
gregation would be too large to find accommodation within their humble dwelling.
Here they were visited in 1751 by Dr. Thomas de Burgo, who, in his “ Hibernia
Dominicana,” says :—‘‘’The members of this convent, in the year 1756, are—
R. Father Preacher-General, Brother John Gribben, Prior, in the 54th year of
his age, and the 27th of his profession ; Father Brother Heber Magennis, Sub-
Prior, in the 49th year of his age, and the 24th of his profession; and Father
Brother James Hillon, Procurator, in the 53rd year of his age, and the 2oth of
his profession.” The writer was told by an old man, the nearest neighbour of Widow

~ Mullan, that the friars were forced to leave Moneyscalp because the landlords
(middlemen under the Downshire family), John and Felix O’Neill, who lived at
Banvale, near Hilltown, and their brother Hugh, who resided at Ardilea, near
Clough, had raised the rent of their little farm so high that they could not pay
it. In 1766 Friar Gribben was residing in the parish of Kilcoo. He died in
the house of a namesake and relative of his in Wateresk. Friar Hillan was
curate in 1766 to Dr. Macartan, in Downpatrick, He afterwards was curate in
Bright, where he died in the townland of Ballyvastin, and was buried in Ross-
glass. The writer has not been able to discover anything about Friar Magennis.
With these the Convent of Villa Nova (Newtownards) may be said to have become
defunct. There were, however, after their times, Friars Rice and Burns, who
assumed the name and garb, but they no longer lived in community, and the discip-
line of Villa Nova was gone.

38 Saud.—The “ Terrier” returns “the Abbey of Saule” as bound to pay the bishop
‘*in proxies, 3 marks; in refections, 3 marks ; and in synodals, 2s.” By aninqui-
sition taken at Downpatrick, April gth, 1622, it appears that Thomas Cromwell, Earl
of Ardglass, had been seized of the site and precincts of the late monastery of

vu

