--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-252.png ---
220 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

Uskechaoin ; in Inisoen ; an abbey was founded here by St.
Columb, which is now a chapel in the diocess of Derry, ac-
cording to Colgan.”

COUNTY OF DOWN.

Achadhcaotl ;\ near the bay of Dundrum, in the barony of
Lecale. St. Killen, who was abbot of this church, lived in the
fifth century ;* and St. Senan was also abbot of it about the
year 560.

‘Tr. Th., p. 495. * Act. SS., p. 73, and 541. "/d., p. 742.

at once, and rolling them up in a sheet, fastened with a dé/g, orpin. sent them in a
boat to be consigned to the deep. The ae/g, or pin. gave way as the boat crossed
the harbour. when one of the children fell into the water and disappeared ; the other
two were drowned at a spot which is, from this circumstance, called Port-a-delg.
The child that had fallen out and disappeared was invisibly carried away by the
banshee, ‘‘ Biroge of the mountain,” to his father on the mainland, who sent him
to his brother Gavida, to be brought up to his trade, which, in those days, ranked
among the most respectable professions,

Balor, hearing how MacKineely had deceived and injured him, crossed the sound
with a band of his fierce associates, and, landing at a place called Ballyconnell,
succeeded in taking him; and, laying his head on a large white stone, cut it clean
off with one blow of his ponderous sword. This stone, with its red veins, still tells
of this deed of blood, and gives its name to the present district of Cloganeely. It
may be seen now in the grounds of W. Olpherts, Esq., who has carefully
placed it on a pillar six feet high. The heir of MacKineely had, in the meantime,
grown up to be an able man and an excellent smith. Fully aware of the circum-
stances of his birth and escape, and his father's cruel death, he meditated revenge.
This he at length realized ; for Balor one day came to the forge when the young
MacKineely was alone working, and happened. in the course of conversation, to
allude with pride to his victory over MacKineely, never suspecting that he spoke
tohis son. ‘The young smith, fired with rage, watched his opportunity, and
taking a glowing rod from the furnace, thrust it through the basilisk eye of Balor,
thus amply avenging his father’s death, and fulfilling the prediction of the Druid.

1 Achadhcaoil— Among the possessions of the see of Down at the end of the
twelfth century, which are recited in a patent roll of the Tower of London. as
quoted by Dr. Reeves, are ‘‘ Rathmurvul along with Rathscillan.” The former
is Maghera, but there is a difficulty in identifying Rathscillan. as there is no place
in that neighbourhood known by the name; and yet. as is evident by the
grouping of the names, it must have been in the neighbourhood of Maghera, and,
like Magh-ra, it must have been in early t'mes the scene of the piety and labours
of some eminent ecclesiastic. _ Rathscillan signifies ‘‘the Rath of Cillan.” St.
Donard had a brother named Cillen, whose church was somewhere in the neigh-
bourhood. Engus the Culdee, in his tract on the ‘‘ Mothers of the Saints of
Ireland.” refers to Cillen (Killen) in a passage which I translate from Co!gan’s
Latin translation of the original Irish :—“ Derinilla, called Cethuir-Chicheach
(i.¢., of the four provinces), was the mother of SS. Doman; (Donard), son of
Eachachand Aillean, and Aidan, and Muran of Fathen (now Fahan in Inishowen),
and Mochumma of Drumbo, and Cillen of Achadhcail, in the territory of Lecale,
at the bank of the estuary of Dundrum.” Ina field in Wateresk belonging to Mr.
Savage, and immediately adjoining his house, are the remains of an ancient ceme-

