--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-108.png ---
88 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

Kilnagallech;® on the shore of the river Shannon and two
miles and an half N. W. of Inis Scattery.

St. Senan gave the veil to the daughters of Nateus in Kil-
cochaille, now called Kilnacaillech, or the Church of the Nuns,
not far from Inis Scattery."

Killoen;*! in the barony of Islands. About the year 1190
Donald O’Brien, King of Limerick, founded an abbey here

bAct. SS. p. $40.

opposes the whole stream of Irish history, for every authority states that Xi/ da /ua,
means the church of St. Molua, the /eper. On this subject a few observations are
here called for:

““Was Ledwich certain that Killaloe means the church near the water? He
could not have been, because he was not master of the Irish e, and even if
he were, he could not be certain that his interpretation was correct, for Lua, though

iven in the Irish vocabularies ‘without authority’ as one of the primitive words
for water, is not to be found in composition in any Irish book or is. or entering
into the names of places in any part of Ireland ; and even if Zua were found in the
names of places as signifying wafer, it could not be certain that it meant water
when placed after the term C#// a church. * * * A * * .

St. Molua was succeeded by St. Flannan, who was consecrated bishop of the

Place about the year 639, and from that period forward Killaloe is mentioned in
irish history as the seat of a bishop. ‘or the history of Killaloe, see Harris’s
** Ware,” and ‘‘ Annals of the Four Masters,” transcribed into the first volume of
the “Clare Extracts,” pp. 335, 336, 338, 340, 341, 342, 343, 344, 345, & 346,

The well of St. Flannan, who became patron of the diocese is situated in
the east corner of Killaloe town, and N. W. of the Cathedral. His memory was
formerly celebrated at it on the 18th of December, but now it is visited on any
day the pilgrims think proper.

mediately to the north of the Cathedral there is a small stone-roofed church,
or Duirtheach, not unlike St. Columkille’s house at Kells, or St. Kevin’s kitchen
at Glendalough. It measures on the outside 36 feet 4 inches in length, and
35 feet in breadth. The doorway is placed in the west gable, but I could not
ascertain its original height, as the ground is several feet raised. It is 4 feet 8
inches in width at the point where the arch springs. The height from the present
level of the ground to the vertex of the arch is 6 feet. This doorway is semicir-
cular at the top, and consists of four concentric circles not unlike the doorway of
the church of Rahen, in the King’s County ; of Incha Gaill, in Lough Corrib ; and
of St. Caimin’s church on Inis Cealtra.

In the very sharp gable over this doorway is placed near the top a round-headed
window, which afforded light to the upper story. The roof is of stone, and seems
to have been very firmly constructed, but it is now much broken and overgrown
with grass and small ash trees, P

The little choir of this Duirtheach is now destroyed, but its breadth can be as-
certained from stones projecting from the east gable. The choir arch is not unlike
in form that in St. Kevin’s kitchen, but not so high, being only 8 feet 6 inches high
from the present level of the ground. Over this little choir arch, near the top of
the gable is placed a rectilineally-pointed window, not unlike those found in many
of the round towers.—Ordnance Survey of Clare, Royal Irish Academy, vol ii.,

9.
Li Bhs church of Kilnagallegh is the church anciently called Crl/-Leochaille, and
appears to be that which is now called Aii/-na g-Caillech, e.i. Cella Sanctimonialium
4. e. Church of the Nuns, situated not far from St. Senan’s church of /nis Cathaigh,
in the country of Corcabaischin.
The Irish lives of St. Senan record his visit to this church the day previous to
his death, and his bequest of a relic to them for their protection.
% This abbey was situated in the parish of Killowne (or Clareabpey), in the
barony of Islands, about two and a half miles south by west from Ennis, on the old

