--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-317.png ---
County of Down, 281

the sky there exists a hermitage sacred to St. Domanghart. From the foot of
the mountain on the east there stretches an agreeable plain, where there is a
fortress of the Magenis family called New Castle, which was bumed by the hostile
Scots in 1643. In this plain, not far from the aforesaid castle, is situate the
parish church of Maghare-rath (Maghera); the name of the saint to whom it is
sacred, my memory does not at this moment supply. One thing I can state, that
it, as well as many other sacred places, was endowed with no inconsiderable
estates by the chiefs of the MacCartan family, who formerly enjoyed an extensive
rule in these parts, and I may add that I know not of any other nobles who
were more generous to the Church of God than the lords of that most ancient
family, for it is an acknowledged fact that they both built all the churches in the
territories of Ivechia (Iveagh) and Kinnalfagartay (Kinalarty), and endowed them
with the choicest lands.” Father MacCana ascribes too much to the MacCartans,
for many of those churches were endowed by the Magenises and other co-re-
latives of the MacCartans. The ruins of the ancient church of Maghera, of which
the western gable and the south wall remain, measure forty-five feet nine inches
in length and twenty-one feet six inches in breadth. The beautiful Norman arch
at the western entrance is in good preservation ; the windows in the south wall
are narrow and of elegant design. _A little to the N. W. is the stump of a round
tower. Only about twenty feet of it now remains, Its doorway is towards the
East, and about seven feet above the ground. Harris, speaking of the grave-
yard, says :—‘‘ Near it formerly stood an high round tower, which, about thirty
years ago, was overturned by a violent storm, and lay at length and entire on the
ground, like a huge gun, without breaking to pieces, so wonderfully hard and
binding was the cement in this work.” The round tower was, therefore, thrown
down about the year 1710 or 1712. The founder and patron saint of Maghera
was St. Donard, whose festival occurs on the 24th of March. Colgan, writing
in 1645 on St. Donard, states that in the Church of Maghera ‘‘ there are preserved.
in great veneration a bell called Zhe Glunan, which formerly belonged to this
saint, and one of his shoes enshrined in a precious covering of silver and gold.”
These sacred articles are now entirely unknown in the locality, nor is there the
slightest tradition respecting them. In the Irish * Tripartite Life of St. Patrick,”
which is now preserved in the Bodleian Collection, a translation of which has
appeared in Sister M. F. Cusack’s ‘‘ History of St. Patrick,” there occurs the
following curious legend :—‘‘ There are moreover keepers of Patrick’s people in
Erinn living still. . . . . There is another man from him in Sliabh-Slainge
—that is, Domangart, son of Eochaidh. It is he that will raise Patrick's relics a
little before the judgment. His cell is in Rath-murbhuilg, at the side of Sliabh-
Slainge. And there is always a leg (of mutton), with its accessaries, and a vessel
of ale before him every Easter, which is given to Mass people on Easter Monday
always.” The story of the leg of mutton and its accessaries may have had its
origin in the belief that plenty would attend during the year the person who
heard Mass on Easter Monday in Maghera Church, while the legend that St.
Donard is preserved alive to raise the relics of St. Patrick before the general
judgment, seems to indicate that he was at the translation of that saint’s relics
referred to in the ‘* Book of Armagh”—‘* When the church was being built over
the body, the men who were digging the ground saw fire bursting forth out of the
sepulchre, and flying back, they were afraid of the torching fire of flame.” A
statement in Harris’s ‘‘ History of the County Down,” is confirmatory of this
opinion.” He says :—“ A tradition in this neighbourhood highly celebrates the
virtues, devotion, and miracles of St. Donard, now called Donogh, or Donat,
and that by his application much money was collected for building the Cathedral
of Down.”

We have seen that St. Dounard was a bishop, and it may have been because
Maghera was a see that it enjoyed the privilege of having a round tower. There is
not preserved the name of any of St. Donard’s successors in the see, and it would
seem that at an early date it, like many other minor sees, became incorporated in the
diocese of Down, and the bishop enjoyed the ancient see lands of Maghera. Among
the possessions of the see of Down at the end of the twelfth century, which are te-
cited in a patent roll of the tower of London, as quoted by Dr. Reeves, are
**Rathmurvul along with Rathscillan,” The former is Maghera, but there is a

