--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-100.png ---
80 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

St. Senan of Corca Baiscin founded an abbey here before
the arrival of St. Patrick in Munster, as some report;° but
others say that St. Patrick himself was the founder, and that
he placed St. SenanP here: he had eleven churches for his
monks, and no women were permitted to land on the island
before the coming of the Danes into this country.1_ The pre-
lates of this noble and ancient church are sometimes called by
our ecclesiastical historians bishops, and at other times abbots;
in process of time it became a priory of regular canons.’

A.D. 538. St. Kieran, who was called the son of the Car-
penter, having left the island of Arran, came hither, and was
made providore for the strangers by St. Senan.*

544. St. Senan died on the Ist of March, and was buried in
this abbey;* his festival is observed on the 8th of that month,"
and a superb monument was erected to his memory.”

°O'Halloran, vol. 2. p. 44. Usher, p. 454. 0'Halloran, vol. 2, p. 236.
TAct. SS. p. "42. “Usher. *Act. SS. p. 502, 542. “Vard. p. 159. “O'Halloran sup.

tensem hodie uivisus.” Primordia, p.873. See also ‘ Annals of the Four Masters”
at the year 1188, note n.

The bell of St. Senan mentioned above is that so beautifully described in the fifth
chapter of St. Odran’s Irish Life of St. Senan. It properly belonged to the
ancient church called Cei// 7-Senain (Senan’s Church), situated in the townland of
Fuidismaigh, north-west of the town of Kilrush. This venerable relic of the Apostle
of Jniscathaig was auciently known as_ Clog-na-neal (i. ¢. the bell of the clouds),
because it was believed to have descended on the clouds from heaven to St. Senan,
but it is now more commonly known as Clog-an-Oir (or the golden bell), because
(as this old life states) it resembled gold in its appearance.

This so-called C/og-an-Oir (or golden bell) of St. Senan, so long venerated in
the west of Clare, may be now seen inthe Museum of the Royal Irish Academy,
but it does not warrant the derivation of the name in its present appearance. It
is now more of a silver colour, but it may be possible that the gold and crystal
ornamentations have fallen off while the bell itself lay hidden in the earth.

This old life mentions the round tower of unis Cathaigh, too, and in such a way
as to leave no doubt of its period and origin, as well as of the use made of it in
St. Senan’s time (say about the year 540). As this passage has never been pub-
lished, and as it seems to bear so directly on the “Origin and use of the Round
Towers,” it may not be out of place to give it here :

“Ro tagaid pe Seandn a n-mnmyp catarg peatc v-ceampéolt no cigid
pagalca. Vo Biod ag Seandn an-aon ndtv peargaro bpdtamp acar Tpocan
TAHene anoro etle maille pe mopreippiup eapbog 4 n-inmip catarg. Ro
innpioth For pe Seandn a n-innip catarg clogar 1onna paid ceao ocer cuig
Cpoigte Veag afi doipoe, ronnur apn m-bert v0 élég ab-pogur 04 B4pin 50
B-cloincig op fead Copncabairgin mile fuaim an éLlorg 1onnur 50 m- biod-
toobuine apa vednnad on gaé ceall va b-puil a §-Copncabairginn on can
Tpa 00 bead Seapdn Fons Loce LeanbBuna 04 Véannad a n-innip Catdrg.”

«St. Senan built seven churches or religious houses in /unis Cathaigh. Senan
used to have sixty friars in one church, and thirty priests, together with seven
Bishops, in another church in /unis Cathaigh. Senan, too, built a Cty, (belfry)
in Jnnis Cathaigh, which was one hundred and fifteen feet in height, so that
when ‘a bell was placed in it near to its top, the sound of the bell used to be
heard all over Corcabhaisgin, so that sacrifice used to be made in every church in
Corcabhaisgin at the same time that Senan and his followers were engaged in
offering it in Jnnis Cathaigh.” Vita Senani, chap. vi.

