--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-331.png ---
County of Dublin 293

adjoins the town of Downpatrick, between two roads, the one
leading to Crems, and the other to the Grange of Saul; he
gave it to the regular canons of the church of the Virgin
Mary at Carlisle, and endowed it with three carucates of land
adjacent thereto, together with all the lands, meadows, pas-
tures, mills, and other aisements thereunto belonging, a bur-
gage within the town of Down, and all the tithes of his house,
and house expenses and demesnes. King Edward II. con-

firmed this grant!
1 Mon. Angl.—Vol.ii., p. 1046.

road is a triangular field, bounded on one side by a bog, and on the other by two
roads, which lead respectively to Killyvees (Crems) and to Saul Quarter (the
Grange of Saul) : here human bones have been found in great quantities. This is
supposed to have been the site of the priory of St. Thomas the Martyr.—See
Papers on Down and Connor, by Rev. J. O’Laverty, P.P.

COUNTY OF DUBLIN.

Baldongan;* in the barony of Balruddery, and in the country
of Fingall.?

The Knights Templars, according to some writers, had an
house here dedicated to the Virgin Mary.*

The castle of Baldongan is about two miles from the sea,
and is boldly and conspicuously situated on a rising ground,
commanding an extensive prospect of the circumjacent
country. It consists, on the west end, of two large square
towers, with a parapet in front covering a passage between
each ; from these towers a regular building is carried on each
side, but narrower, to which a similar tower is joined at the
north east angle, but at the south east angle is only a smaller
tower, in which are the stairs leading to the battlements, and
on the front are the arms of the Lords of Howth.

® Sones's Life of St. Patrick.

1 Baldongan, or Ballindungan, i.e, V&ile én Odmzm. An ancient rath
or moat occupied the site of the ruined castle and church ; hence the name, the site
of the fortress or dungeon. The buildings referred to by Archdall are now in a very
ruinous state; some of the side walls of the castle are utterly destroyed. This castle
was defended by Col. Fitzwilliam for the Parliamentarians in 1641, but surrendered
to the Royalists, by whom it was dismantled. Within the last half century it has
been reduced to its present ruinous condition.

3Fingall (Fine Gaill), the territory of the foreigners, so called from the numerous
Danish settlements effected there in the ninth and tenth centuries, from A.D. 795,‘'for
the space of eight score and ten years.”—(W.G.G. p. clxxi., n. 3). Its northern
boundary is the River Delvin (Ailbhine). It extended southwards to the River
Tolca to Cnoc-Moel-Doid, west of Finglas. The locality called Shan-Magh-n-
alta-Edair formed the southern portion of Magh Breagh. The ancient name of
Fingall, conterminous with the northern part of the county Dublin, was Magh
Muiredha—(Annals, Four Masters, A.D. 460, Reeves’ Adamnan, p. 108). It

