--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-225.png ---
: have endured on inscribed stone.

County of Donegall. 193

Hilfothuir ; an abbey was founded here for monks of the
Cistertian order A.D. 1194 by O'’Dogharty ; it was a daughter
of the abbey of Asrhoe, and in process of time was united to it.4

9 Allemande.

ants, and the fervour of the proselytes, form perhaps one of the brightest and
Most interesting chapters in the history of Christianity. Tyrconnell shared in
the general blessing. There is a beautiful tradition connected with the great
saint’s visit to this district. The Apostle, in his progress through the island, after
resting on Magh-Ith in Cuil-Chonaillhe, went in his chariot the next day to the
stream which is called Daol. The spindles of the chariot broke, were mended,
and_ broke again ; and then Patrick, addressing those with him, said, through the
spirit of prophecy, ‘Do not wonder, for the land from the stream northwards
does not stand in need of a blessing, for that a son shall be born there who shall
be called the Dove of the Churches (Collum-cille), who shall bless the land to the
north, and it is in honour of him that God has prohibited my blessing this land.’
Ath-an-Charpaid (ford of the chariot) on the Daol, is the name of that ford. St.
Patrick also blessed the south side of the cataract (Eas) of Ballyshannon, and said
that he left the north side to be blessed by Collum-Cille. About a century after-
wards this Dove of the Churches having gone out from Cinel-Conall, returned to give
the blessing, which, according to St. Patrick, had been reserved for him. He was a
youth of princely descent. His name was Crimthain. His father was Felim, the
grandson of Conal-Gulban, and his mother, Ethnea, a daughter of the royal house of
Cahir-Mor, of Leinster. Born in 521, he was, according to the usage of the time,
placed in fosterage with a relative at Kilmacrenan. From boyhood he had been instruc-
ted in the love of Christ, and by the grace of God, and his zeal for wisdom, had so
preserved the integrity of his body, and the purity of his soul, that, though dwelling
on earth, he appeared to live like the saints in heaven.! He passed from his fosterage
to the school of St. Finian, and made a course of studies under the famous master
in the school of Moville, at the head of Strangford Lough. Thence he passed to
another celebrated Finian at the famous school of Clonard, and thence through
other schools ; for already had there risen in Erinn many institutions in which
sanctity and learning were taught together. Famed throughout the length and
breadth of the land for his learning, and still more for his sanctity, abundant
attested by splendid miracles, he took priest’s orders, and returned to the north
about the year 544. He traversed Cinel Conall, leaving monuments of his piety
and zeal on the hill of Doire Calgaigh (Derry),on the rock of Torry, in the remote
Seanglean, everywhere, on sea-cliff and in deep glen, and though these monuments,
like all that is perishable, have yielded to the corrosive action of time, and in but
too many instances, to the more destructive fury of man, the traveller of to-da
will be able, from the traditions still clinging to the rude cross, or the blessed well
or the grass-grown remains of a ares to gather a better record of him than could
is blessing went beyond the lands of Tyrcon-
nell. His wonderful sanctity of life, and his many miraculous tokens of divine
favour, marked: him out as indeed a man of God, and drew disciples around him.
Thus he became the father of an order of monks, distinguished, even in that fer-
vent age, for the severity of their rule. Among the many abbeys which he founded
in Ireland were those of Doire Calgaigh, Durrow, Swords, and Kells, all houses
famous in the ecclesiastical annals of Erinn. In the forty-second year of his age,
St. Columba, resolving to seek a foreign country for the love of Christ, sailed from
Treland to Britain. as Scotland was then called. He was graciously welcomed by
Conall, king of the Albanian Scots, anda relative of his own, who gave him
the island of Hy or Iona. St. Columba had twelve disciples with him, and laid
the foundation of the monastery of Hy, which soon became the most famous in
northern Europe, and, for centuries after, the recognised head of his order. From
Tona he ventured to carry the light of Christianity among the heathens, and with
God’s blessing, he planted the standard of Christ in the Orkney Isles, in the

1 Life of St. Columba, by Adamnan.


