--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-214.png ---
186 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

Donegall ;" is situated in a bay to which it gives name, in
the barony of Tyrhugh, and is a market town and borough
sending burgesses to parliament.

A monastery for Franciscan friars of the strict observance"
was founded here, in the year 1474, by Odo Roe, son of Nial
Garbh O’Donnell, Prince of Tyrconnell; and by his wife
Fionguala (Penelope), daughter of Connor na srona O’Brien,
Prince of Thomond.™" Odo, the founder, died July the 28th,

2 War. Mon. ™ Ann. Four Masters.

7 Donegall. The abbey of Donegall may be fairly considered the most famous
in Ireland, for it was the dwelling place of the ‘‘ Four Masters,” and in it they
compiled their celebrated ‘‘ Annals.” The late lamented O’Curry, who was a
distinguished professor in the Catholic University, has left us, in one of his lec-
tures delivei in that institution, a beautiful sketch of this remarkable work and
its illustrious authors. ‘‘In whatever point of view,” says the lamented Professor,
“‘we regard these Annals, they must awaken feelings of deep interest and res-
pect, not only as the largest collection of national, civil, military, and family his-
tory ever brought together, in this or perhaps any other country, but also as the final
winding-up of the affairs of a people who had preserved their mationality and
independence for a space of over two thousand years, till their complete over-
throw about the time at which this work was compiled. It is no easy matter
for an Irishman to suppress feelings of deep emotion when speaking of the com-
pilers of this great work, and especially when he considers the circumstances under
which, and the objects for which, it was undertaken. The chief of these now
called Four Masters, was Michael 0'Cleary, and his collaborators were Ferfessius
O'Maelchonaire, Peregrime or Cugory O’Dubhghennain, men of consummate
learning in the antiquities of the country, and of approved faith, and to these,
subsequently. was added the co-operation of other distinguished antiquarians.
‘The great object,’ says Doctor O’Connor, ‘of the Four Masters is to give
chronological dates, and, with the exceptions above, nothing can be more accurate.
The years of foundations and destructions of churches and castles, the obituaries
of remarkable persons, the inaugurations of kings, the battles of chiefs, the con-
tests of clans, the ages of bards, abbots, bishops, &c., are given with a m
fidelity which leaves nothing to be wished for but some details of manners. which
are the grand desideratum in the chronicles of the British Islands.’ With all
that Doctor O’Connor hasso judiciously said here I fully agree,” continues O’Curry.
“ A book consisting of 11,000 quarto pages, beginning with the year of the world
2242, ending with the year of our Lord’s incarnation 1616, thus covering the im-
mense space of 4500 years of a nation’s history, must be dry and meagre of detail
in some, if not in all parts of it. And although the learned compilers had at their
disposal, or within their reach, an immense mass of historic details, still the
circumstances under which they wrote were so unfavourable, that they appear to
have exercised a sound discretion, and one consistent with the economy of time
and of their resources, when they left the details of our very early history in the
safe keeping of such ancient original records as from remote ages preserved them,
and collected as much as they could make room for of the events of more modern
times, in which they lived themselves. . . . The last part of the Annals was
evidently intended to be a history.”

When I said, in the beginning, that this famous chronicle was compiled in the
original abbey, I was wrong ; it was written not in the original monastery, but
in a few cottages built out of the debris of its calcined ruins, after it had been
burned by the English in the September of 1601, nearly two centuries after its
original foundation. The circumstances of this conflagration are a matter of
history. The young Red Hugh O’Donnell, after a successful escape from his
Jong and dreary imprisonment in Dublin Castle, hastened to his native mountains of
Tyrconnell, put himself at the head of his brave clansmen, who gathered to
welcome him, and was soon sweeping the English from the positions they had

