--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-241.png ---
County of Donegall. 209

The extent of this island is scarcely three-quarters of an
Trish acre ; the cave of the purgatory is built of free-stone, and
covered with broad flags and green turf laid over them; in
length, within the walls, it measures sixteen feet and a half,
and in breadth, about two feet and an inch; when the door
is shut, no light can be discovered save what enters at a small
window in the corner’ In 1630 the government of Ireland
thought fit to have it finally suppressed, and it was accord-

ingly dug up, to the no small distress and loss of the Roman
Catholic clergy.”

Movill; on Loughfoyle, in Inisoen. St. Patrick founded
the monastery of Domnachbile, commonly called Maghbile,
and placed there A-ngussius, the son of Olild. For some time

this was in high repute,* and we meet with the following
abbots of it :—*

A.D. 590. St. Finian flourished about this time ;> as did St.
Siollan in 618.°

Y War. Mon. * War. Annals. * Tr. Th., p. 145 and 181. » Act. SS., p. 347.
© Ann. Four Masters. .

that Sir William proceeds to the island, and reports that he found an abbot and
forty friars, and that there was a daily resort of four hundred and fifty pilgrims,
who paid eight pence each for admission to the island. Sir William further
informs the Privy Council, that in order to hinder the seduced people from going
any longer to this stronghold of Purgatory, and wholly to take away the abuse
hereafter, he had directed the whole to be defaced and utterly demolished ; there-
fore the walls, works, foundations, vaults, &c., he ordered to be rooted up, also
the place called St. Patrick’s bed, and the stone on which he knelt. These and
all other superstitious relics he ordered to be thrown into the lough, and he made
James McGrath, the owner of the island, to enter into recognizance that he should
not in future permit the entrance of Jesuits, friars, nuns, or any other superstitious
order of Popery, to enter therein.” The venerable Monastery of St. Dabheog,
was at this time inkabited by Augustinian friars. They were expelled, the
monastery pulled down, and the whole penitential establishment ‘‘defaced and
demolished.” In consequence of this thorough ‘‘ rooting up,” by Sir William
Stewart, the locale of the station was changed to the present Station Island, which
is smaller and farther removed from the shore. It is a barren strip of rock,
without a single green patch to relieve the eye, and the few buildings built
upon it look, from the distance, like portions of the rock on which they stand.
Between it and the shore a ferry-boat plies, from the 1st June to the 15th of
August ; it carries the pilgrims to and from the island, and for this privilege pays a
handsome sum to the lord of the soil. These pilgrims or penitents retire to this
remote retreat to withdraw themselves more thoroughly from the distraction
and bustle of temporal affairs. They make three days’ spiritual recollection,
fast on bread and water, keep vigil for one whole night in the church, and finish
by approaching the holy sacraments of confession and communion. The mountain
solitudes, the vast desolation, the wild screaming of the trumpet announcing the
ceparture of the ferry-boat, and other mournful surroundings of the place—all
kindle in the soul feelings of awe and reverence, and fill it with a keener sense of
the power of God, and of the strict account he will require of each one, when his
brief term of life is brought to a close. The place is graphically described
by the Rev. Mr. Otway in his valuable work on Donegal, from which I have
already quoted at some length. In a sketch of his excursion to this famous
Lough he writes:—‘‘ The road from the village of Pettigo, leading towards
Lough Derg, runs along a river tumbling over rocks ; and then, after proceeding

P

