--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-135.png ---
County of Cork. 109

present See house; but he certainly mistakes, for that abbey
was at Cluainchreduil, which is in the county of Limerick.

the Holy See for Ireland at the time of the English invasion, and was succeeded
ies Legatine authority by the celebrated Matthew O’Heney, archbishop of
el.

The subsequent history of the See till the Reformation era may be seen in Ware.
Much additional light is thrown on this period by the Pipe Roll of Cloyne, pub-
lished in Cork, in 1859, by Richard Caulfield, Esq. In the Preface the learned
editor gives the following description of the contents of this valuable fragment of
our Diocesan literature:—

‘* This roll is said by Ware to have been begun in the year 1364, in the time of
John Swafham, a Carmelite Friar and Doctor of Divinity, who was then Bishop of
Cloyne, and so its earlier dates seem to show ; but after a while, many documents
much older than the time of that bishop, were included. It consists of a series of
entries, being copies and abridgments of findings of juries, and acts and deeds re-
lating to, or affecting the temporalities of the See of Cloyne, and was probably an
imitation of an English practice long established. The bishop in those times was
a great feudal lord, holding lands and seignories in the same manner as lay barons,
and sitting in the Parliament or great council, in right of his territorial possessions.
In England, such baronies, whether lay or ecclesiastical, originally consisted of lands
held in capite, that is, immediately from the king, without any intermediate lord ;
but many of those held by laymen, becoming reduced by alienation or subdivisions,
the Crown adopted an arbitrary practice of summoning whom they pleased, and
this gradually ripened into law. But in the case of bishops and peeral abbots, the
ground of the nght to sit as Barons of Parliament, seemed to have continued as
it originally stood, except in so far as it has been affected by special legislation.
In Ireland, a tenure in capite was never essential to a lay barony ; and probably
the bishops and abbots themselves were, in general, undertenants. It appears
from some documents near the fend of the roll, that the bishops of Cloyne held
large estates as feudatories of the Barry and Roche families. . . . .

“* The time when lawlessness began to prevail in the county of Cork is rather
distinctly vindicated by the nature of some of the entries of the roll. At first all
transactions between the bishops and their feudal and other tenants, proceeded
regularly according to the English Law, without disturbance from any aggressor.
At last, in 1402, appears a deed, by which Lord Barry formally agrees with the
Bishop of Cloyne, to impose no legal burthens or exactions on bim or his tenants.
Immediately after, others make a like agreement with the Bishop, whose sacred
character, of course, formed his sole claim to exemption from the ill-treatment
which others were obliged to submit to. In the same year Maurice Roche, Lord of
Fermoy, binds himself in like manner to the Bishop and Ecclesiastics, and in case
of infraction, agrees to submit to excommunication without any legal process. In
the third year of Henry IV. appears a document, by which the Earl of Ormond
~-as Lord of half the Barony of Inchiquin, and farmer of the other half—takes the
Bishop of Cloyne and his goods and property into his special protection, By
another document, about the same time, the King interferes for the protection of
the Bishop. Then follows another document, on the same subject, closing the
series. ere the roll was discontinued, probably in consequence of the utter
impossibility of stemming the tide of outrage, or enforcing any longer the rights of
the see according to law. It appears from the roll that villeinage, of which so
little trace can be found elsewhere in Irish documents, was anciently quite prevalent,
and it further appears, that men of Irish race, living on the Bishop's estates, were
destitute of any rights in their own labour, being seemingly in a similar condition
with that class in England, who were called villeins in gross. In the year 1348
there occurs, as the reader may see, a finding of a jury, that John, who was called
Lowis, is mere Irish, and of the race (progenie) O’Karny, and that all his goods,
lands, and tenements, are the property of the Lord Bishop of Cloyne, because
all of the race of O’Karny, are Irishmen, of the Church of St. Colman, and born
in servitude : yet it appears in the same finding, that this John Lowis hath
thirteen tenanted houses, and some land.”

