--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-218.png ---
190 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

Fahan ,° six miles North West of Derry, on Loughswilly,
in Inisoen.

St. Columb founded the church of Fathenmura, called also
Fothenmor.*

St. Colman Imromha was abbot of Fathenmura, as was St.
Murus, or Muran, the son of Feradach; who was also
esteemed the patron of the place’

A.D. 637. The abbot St. Kellach, the son of Saran, died
on the 7th of October.*

716. Tradition says, that this year a shower of hail, like
silver, fell upon Fathen major, as did honey in like abundance
upon Fathan minor, and that in Leinster it rained blood.*

* Act. SS., p. 334. Tr. Th. p. 495 and 510. *Jd., p. 510. “Jd.

°Fahan—The following entries of this old and venerable monastery are made by the
Four Masters :—‘‘ A.D. 657, Ceallach, son of Saran, abbot of Otham-Mor, died ;
A.D. 716, a shower of silver fell here; A.D. 757, Robhartach, son of Cuana, abbot
of Athain-Mor died.” From this, it appears, the abbey of Fahan was known by the
names Athain-Mor and Othain-Mor. It was called Fathain-Mura from St. Murus or
Muranus, an illustrious abbot, who once governed this monastery with great suc-
cess, and left a distinguished name behind him. The life and character of St.
Muranus, the ancient glories of Fahan, and the utter obliteration of its interesting
remains, as well the destruction of its relics by the fury of the Reformers, are de-
scribed at length, and eloquently, by Colgan in his Acta Sanctorum. ‘In the northern
parts of Ulster, in the peninsula commonly called Inis-Eogan, in the beginning of
the 7th century, flourished a holy man named Murus, or Muranus, who was des-
cended from most noble ancestors, but he far surpassed the nobleness of his family
by the splendour of his virtues. Though this holy man is ranked among the
chief Saints of his own province, so that even at this day in the fresh observances
among our people his memory and veneration flourish, and his festival is cele-
brated ; we have not as yet seen his acts, which certainly were formerly in
existence. I have, however, resolved to produce the very few notices which I have
collected about him in the following points. He derived his descent from the
most illustrious family of the O’Neills, s.¢., Kinel-Owen, being the son of Freda-
cius. Eugenius was Roman’s father; but this is not the Eugenius who was the
great progenitor of this famous family, but his grandson, by his son Muredacius,
who, for distiction sake, was surnamed Merchrom. The mother of St. Muranus
was called Derimilla, famous for her descent from the first rank of nobility, but now
renowned for the happy and blessed fruit of her womb. This happy woman was
the mother of six children, who were all engaged in the service of God, and
honoured by posterity with the veneration and respect of saints, though all were
not the fruit of one marriage. Their names were St. Mura, abbot of Fahan; St.
Mochumna, abbot of Drumbo ; St. Cillenus, of Achadh-Cail ; St. Domangard,
son of Eochadius; St. Ailanus, or Ailevius, and St. Aidanus. Though the want
of ancient monuments and the injury of time have withdrawn from us the know-
ledge of the masters and disciples, and acts of this saint, enough, however,
remains to show that he was an abbot, and ruled a convent of monks in the monas-
tery of Fathen, in the diocese of Derry, at the distance of five miles towards the
west from the see and city of Derry. ‘That monastery, which was endowed with
much lands, was, for several centuries, held in great veneration both on account
of the reverence for the most holy Muranus, to whom, as patron of the place, the
great church or cathedral was dedicated, on account of the noble monuments of
antiquity which were preserved there until the time the heretics got possession of
the place, when they, with abhorrence and rabid fury, carried off and destroyed all
its sacred things. But by the ravages of time and the neglect of the rulers that
monastery, formerly celebrated, but afterwards dilapidated and demolished, at
length became a parish church. There existed one little book in which St. Muranus

