--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-162.png ---
136 Anctent Monasteries of Ireland.

here we find a nunnery, of which St. Cannera was abbess,
where she was also honoured.*
Kilcrea,® five miles west of Cork, in the barony of Muskerry.
Nunnery ; St. Cyra, or Chera,” was abbess here ; where her
feast is celebrated October 16th.*

2 Act. SS., p. 1$5. % The Earls of Clancarty had a strong castle here. * Calendar.

of Innis Cathaigh was the largest, the highest, and most brilliant of all, and rose
most directly heavenward On beholding this the holy virgin exclaimed, that is a
beautiful Recles (church) said she, and it is to it I will go, that my resurrection may
be out of it.—O heavenly spouse, said she, whatever church or holy place that is,
it is there I wish my resurrection to be :_ and she then prayed God that she might
not lose sight of that tower of light, but like the tower of fire that led the children
of Israel through the wilderness, so it might lead her into the place; and God
granted her prayer. She set out forthwith, having no guide but the blazing tower of

re which continued to burn without ceasing, both day and night, till she reached
it. When she reached the water at Luimneach (Limerick) she went on foot over
the water as if she walked on the dry ground, and reached the shore at Inis
Cathaigh, at early dawn next morning. St. Senan, knowing this, came to the
shore to meet her and bade her welcome. It is for that I came said Cannera,
and blessed are they who come in the name of the Lord. Go, said Senan, to
my mother and my sister who abide in that island on the east, and you will be en-
tertained by them there. That is not what I come for, said Cannera, but to be
received by yourself into this island, and to remain here in communion of prayer
with you. Women do not abide in this island, said Senan. What is your reason
for that ? said Cannera: Christ did not come less to redeem women than to redeem
men. Christ was crucified not less for women than for men. Women were serv-
ing and attending Him and his apostles, and women do not go less to
heaven than men. You are speaking in vain, said Senan to the holy virgin, there
is no distinction between their souls, but not so with their bodies, and so women
shall not reside in this island as long as I live, said Senan. And will you give me
a place of interment and resurrection in your island, and communion and sacrament
from yourself? You shall have a place of resurrection on the brink of the sea
said Senan, but I fear the tide will take away your remains. I fear not, said she,
for my hope is in the Lord God, and I have confidence in your great sanctity that
you will put a protection over my body. The holy virgin was standing on the
water, and her 7rosda under her bosom as if she had been on the dry land all this
time while Senan was conversing with her, and at last Senan permitted her to
come in on the brink of the island, and Cannera scarcely reached the island
alive. Senan then went into the church and brought communion and sacrament
with him to Cannera, and she then died and was buried in the strand on the
south side of the island, where her grave is. Any personin the state of grace who
Goes to the stone which is over her grave, and who prays there with fervent

ety, beseeching her intercession with the Trinity for him, if he be going on sea,

¢ will return by the grace of God, and he will not be drowned in any part of the
world.”—Life of Saint Senan. O'Looney, MS., C.U.1., chap. 5, pp. 30, 31; see
also Book of Lismore, fol. 64, l.a.

37 Cill Chera. The following passage from an account of the Saints of Erin in
“‘Leabhar Breac,” in the Royal Irish Academy. p. 21, col. 4, mentions this place,
and preserves the names of some of the ancient churches and distinguished saints
in this part of the country :—

“ Nine persons of the race of Conaire, é.e., Senach, son of Coirill, and Eolaing,
from Athbii Bolc in Muscraidh Mittaine, and Odran, from Lathrach Odran in
Muscraidhe Tire ; these are the three seniors of the race of Conaire.

“Creschad from Cill Chera, Gobinait, the sharp-beaked Cad/ech (nun), from
Buirnech (Mourn) in the boundary between Muscraidhe Mittaine and Eoganacht
Locha Lein, and Sciath, daughter of Meachair. in Fert Sceith in Muscraidhe Aeda;
these are the three virgins of the race of Conaire.

“Lachtain of Achad Ur, and of Aie Cind Chaille in Ossory, and from Bealac

