--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-219.png ---
County of Donegall. Igt

720. The abbot St. Killen, or Killian O’Colla, died
January the 3rd.>
769. Died the abbot St. Ultan Hua Beroderg,*
788. Died the blessed abbot Aurothulius.¢
850. Died the abbot Fergal, or Vergil, Hua Laignein.*
1070. Died the abbot Cucarrgius Hua Kellaich.!
1098. Died the abbot Malcmartin, or Martinian Hua
Kellaich¢
1119. Died Roderic, the archidnach of Fathen.*
1136. Died the archidnach Robarthach Hua Kellaich.!
This noble monastery was richly endowed, and for many
ages was held in the highest veneration, as well for the rever-
ence paid to St. Muran, to whom the great church is dedicated,
as for the many monuments of antiquity which remained here,
till they were destroyed after the reformation; among the

> Act. SS. p. 331. © Tr. Thy p. 510. 41d. *Id. id, 8Id. Id. ‘Td,

had written, in the metre of his country’s language, the Acta of St. Columbkille,
and fragments of it are extant at this day, and are often quoted in
other acts of the same saint. There was also another large and very old
manuscript of chronicles and other histories of the whole country which
was always held by antiquarians in great esteem, and often highly praised
by them. Besides there were extant until lately various relics of St. Muranus and
of other saints, who inhabited the same place, but how many of them were saved
from the fury of the heretics, and preserved to the present time, is altogether un-
known to me, who am now living in Belgium, at a great distance from my
native land, though I was formerly intimately acquainted with this very place. There
remains at this day, and is preserved asa most valuable treasure, the crozier or
pastoral staff of the holy prelate, which is commonly called Bachal/ Mura, the staff
of Murus, which is studded over and adorned with gems, and laid in a case which is
gilt with gold. By this several miracles were wrought, and by it were accustomed
to swear the pious people and the nobles, particularly those descended from the
family of the O'Neill’s ; in short, all those who wished to vindicate virtue and
revenge falsehood, or to remove all ambiguity from their assertions, and termin-
ate angry dissensions by the solmnity of an oath. There existed also, before the
troubles of these times, the offce belonging to this saint, of which we formerly
saw fragments, and in which many of his miracles and virtues are recordéd, but
now not even this nor any other monastery are to be found in which his miracles
or acts are to be seen. It is well to remark that St. Muranus is the great patron
of the family of the O’Neill’s, from whom he is descended, and that in the church
of Fathen, in the county of /nis-Zoghan, his festival is celebrated as the patron of
the place, on this day the 12th of March.” Not a trace exists at the present
day of this celebrated crozier, which Colgan says he saw. It is idle to speculate
about its fate, but in all human probability it was brought to the Continent by
some pious Catholic, or destroyed in the Revolution of 1688. Even St. Muranus
himself has dropped out of the memory of the people of Fahan. The only
knowledge they have retained of him is a silly tradition that he began to build
his church on the top of the hill, but was warned off by some blessed birds, who
instructed him to erect it in the valley below. Fahan is now a lovely valley
teeming with the richest vegetation. It was a howling wilderness when the
monks entered and established themselves in its great solitude. Soon, however, a
noble monastery was raised in it, and what was barren waste became green with
waving meadow or yellow with golden corn. This rich vegetation is all that now
remains of the famous home of St. Muranus and his monks. The noble monas-
tery, once its pride, has crumbled into dust.

