--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-296.png ---
260 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

William was prior, and had for his successor Martin, who
was prior in 1260!

William Rede was prior, and resigned in the year 1276.5

The site and precincts of this priory, with the appurtenances,
and eight acres of land within the said site; a whole carucate
or Balliboe in Croknegrange, alias Grangshecum ; a carucate
in Ballinlugge; the quarter called Rinryazuffe, the quarter of
Ilianamaster, alias the Master’s Island ; a carucate in Bally-
bogan, and a balliboe in Ballisdogan were granted to Gerald
Earl of Kildare ; see Lismullen in county of Meath.

Crossbearers.% The priory of St. John the Baptist" in this
town, called the priory of the English, was founded by Sir John
de Courcey in the 12th century, for Crossbearers following the
rule of St. Augustin.!

' King, p.198. &ld. " This priory is given to St. John the Evangelist in King’s
Collections, p. 24. ‘War. Mon.

marks, 2s.” Human remains have been found on the site occupied by the old
jail, and the position of that place would correspond very well with the description
given in the ‘‘ Terrier.” A townland called Carrickmallett is mentioned as a portion
of the possessions of this monastery. It was also possessed of the chapels of
Quoniamstown, Killbride, St. Knoth, and several other chapels and churches. The
Chapel of St. Malachy, which was valued in the taxation of Pope Nicholas at 8s.,
seems to have been the Chapel of the Monastery of the Irish.

Priory of St. Thomas the Martyr—On entering the town by the ancient road,
which leads from the old race-course past the ruined Cromlech, called Samson’s
Stone, there is on the left hand an ancient well called St. Dillon’s Well. which
perhaps should be called St. Aingeal’s (holy angel’s) Well. It is close to the wall
which surrounds the hospital. On the opposite side of the road there is a triangular
field, bounded on one side by a bog, and on the other two sides by the road men-
tioned and by another road which leads to the townland of Killyvees. In this field
human bones have been found in great quantities by Mr. Ferguson, the present

roprietor. Here stood the Priory of St. Thomas the Martyr, otherwise called the
Priory of Toberglorie (the spring of glory), so named from the adjacent well at
which St. Patrick is said to have had a vision of angels. The priory was founded by
John de Courcey for the order of Regular Canons, and made a cell of St. Mary’s,
of Carlisle. The charter given by the founder is preserved in a Patent Roll (12
Ed. II.), and is printed in the Afonasticum Anglicanum. Init the site of the priory
is described as ‘‘ near the spring, which is called Toberglorie, and in a suburb of
Down, between the two roads, one of which leads to Crems and the other to the
Grange of Saul.” Crems is intended for Killyvees, and the ‘‘ Grange of Saul” is
Saul Quarter, near the old race-course. This priory having fallen into decay, its
endowments were, in the year 1512, along with those of the Monastery of the Irish
and the Priory of the English, and of several other religious houses, united to the
cathedral by Tiberius, Bishop of Down.

"9 Crossbearers.— The site of the Priory of St. John the Baptist, or as it was also
called, the Priory of the English, which belonged to the Crouched Friars or Cross-
bearers, is now occupied by the Ebenezer Chapel, and its grounds extended along
John-street, which derives its name from the priory. It is marked on a map of Down,
1729, by a mound in the shape of a horse-shoe, which is referred to by Harris in
his history of Down, who also says :—‘ About sixteen years ago (written in 1744)
Mr. Trotter, as he was making a new garden on Chappel Hill, found another
Agnus Dei, which, being also of freestone, an ignorant servant maid brayed it to
powder for domestic uses. He found vast quantities of human bones in the same
place, which he deposited in one large grave.” On the old mapa place is marked
a little on the south-east of the mound ‘St. John’s Close.” A Patent Roll

