--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-132.png ---
106 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

A.D. 707. An abbey was founded here.*
978. It was plundered by the people of Ossory.*

1089. Dermot, the son of Toirdhealbhach O’Brien, plun-
dered this place.”

* Conry’s MS. *Annal. Inisfal. ™ Id.

The old Latin Life of St. Brendan passes the following eulogy on St. Colman :
“This Colman, the son of Lenin, was for learning and a holy life chief among the
saints, He founded the Church of Cloyne, which is at this day a cathedral, and
famous throughout the province of Munster.”

Cloyne was situated in the territory of Ui-Lethain, and in that sub-division
which was called Ui-Mocaille, a name that is still retained in the barony of Imo-
killy, It is distant nineteen miles from Cork, and “is seated in the heart of a
rich and highly cultivated country, being embosomed in gently rising hills : it does
credit to the choice of the ancient fathers who here took up their abode in very
remote times.”—Brash, ‘‘ Journal of Kilkenny Arch. Soc.” (New Series ii. 253).

To distinguish this see from other churches of the same name—of which there
were several scattered throughout Ireland—it was sometimes called by the name
Cluain-mor, i.e., “‘ The great Cloyne,” but more generally C/uain-uamhea, that is,
“* Cloyne of the caves.” There are some very deep and interesting caves close by
the old cathedral : it is probable St. Colman, or some of his religious, lived in
them in olden times ; and it is the popular tradition that many of the clergy and

eople found a safe retreat there when the country was ravaged by the Danes,

he Protestant Bishop Bennett thus writes of the caves in 1813: ‘‘ The town of
Cloyne is situated on a small limestone eminence, gently rising in the midst of the
valley, through which I suppose Cork Harbour to have once communicated with
the sea, and this eminence, therefore, was once an islahd surrounded with water. . .
On this spot St. Colman, before the year 600, is supposed to have founded his
church, and the security of it must have received no small addition from the cir-
cumstance of a cave, which is on the most elevated part of it, extending in various
branches underground to a great distance. . . . The cave is now in the field
called the Rock-meadow, forming part of the bishop’s demesne, a little east of his
garden wall, and they having been long neglected, and the drains from it choked up,
itis generally full of water in winter, yet there is a large arched passage, running some
hundred yards, leading to another mouth in the shrubbery north of it. A third,
but smaller opening, is also visible in the high ground above the pond ; a fourth,
near the road to the commons ; and these, or similar entrances, gave the name to
the whole of this land of the field of the caverns.” Elsewhere he writes: “The
rock-shrubbery ends at the mouth of a cave of unknown length and depth, which
branches to a great distance under the earth, and is sanctified by a thousand wild
traditions.” Brash further informs us, that ‘‘it is generally believed that the caves
at Cloyne, and the great stalactitical caves at Carrig-a-Crump, about two miles
distant, are connected, which is not improbable. The latter caves have never been
thoroughly explored, though penetrated to a distance of one mile.”

Speaking of the Cathedral, Dr. Bennett writes—‘“' It is a respectable building,
with a handsome nave and transept, and a small choir. By the style of the building
I should suppose it not older than 1250. . . . In the eastern part of the church-
yard, which is large and well planted, still remain the ruins of a small stone
edifice, standing east and west, thirty feet long, and nineteen in breath, known by
the name of St. Colman’s Chapel, and, probably, one of those oratories or early
churches still to be seen at Killaloe, or St. Donat’s, treated of by Ledwich in his
‘ Antiquities." Elsewhere the same writer adds: ‘‘In 1706 the Chapter passed
an order to pull down the battlements of the church, as being too heavy for the
side walls, thus depriving the cathedral of its ancient respectable appearance, and
making it look, as much as they could, like a barn.” An old MS. in the British
Museum, which is believed to have belonged to Sir James Ware (Clarendon
Collection, 4,796), contains a curious account of the graveyard of Cloyne: “ The
best bloods of Ireland,” it says, “ have chosen Cloyne for their lace of burial,
because its founder, being a holy bishop, had such power with , that what
souls had dwelt in the bodies buried under ¢Aa¢ dust would never be adjudged

