--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-216.png ---
188 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

supported by couplets of pillars on a basement ; in one part
are two narrow passages, one over the other, about four feet
wide, ten long, and seven high; they seem to have been
places, for depositing of valuable effects in times of danger ;
the upper one is covered with stones laid along on the beams
of stone that cross it, and the lower one with stones laid
across on the walls; each of them are exactly after the
Egyptian manner of building ; and ina building over it are
plain marks of a regular Roman pediment, although some
other building had been erected against it.*

" Bp. Pococke’s Fournal,

O'Donovan conjectures was destroyed in the conflagration which has been
described. When, and by whom this venerable abbey was first founded is
recorded in the Annals under A.D. 1474, where the following entry is made:—
‘*The Monastery of Donegal was commenced by the O’Donnell, :.¢., by Hugh
Roe, son of Nial Garve O’Donnell, and his wife, Finola, the daughter of O’Brien
(Conor-na-Srona), and was granted by them to God and the friars of St. Francis,
for the prosperity of their own souls, and that the monastery might be a burial
place for themselves and their descendants, and they not only granted this, but

, also conferred many other gifts upon them.” Its foundation, therefore. belongs to

Nuala O’Connor, the pious wife of Hugh Roe O’Donnell. She died, however,
before it was finished, but Fingalla, O’Donnell’s second wife, caused the works to
be continued until the building was completed. It was richly endowed by
O’Donnell—indeed it seems to have been from the first specially favoured by that
rincely family, some of whom took the habit of St. Francis, and many of whom
ie buried there. Among the illustrious persons who sleep within the abbey
precincts a few are mentioned by the Four Masters :—A.D. 1481; Hugh Maguire,
a general, and perfect gentleman for hospitality, knowledge and nobleness. A.D.
1487; Maurice O’Mulconry, teacher of poetry. A.D. 1494; Gillpatrick Maguire.
A.D. 1503 ; Maguire, #.¢., John, son of Philip, son of Thomas More, #.¢., Gilla-
Duy, the choice of the chieftains of Ireland in his time, the most merciful and
humane of the Irish, the best protector of his country and lands, the most warlike
opponent of inimical tribes and neighbours, the best in jurisdiction, authority,
and regulation, both in church and state, died in his fortress of Enniskillen,
on Sunday, the 7th of the calends of April, after having heard mass, and after
the victory of Unction and Penance, and was buried in the monastery of the
friars of Donegal, which he had selected.”

Other remarkable men also lie buried here ; but not to be tedious, I will select
only one name—a remarkable bishop who governed the diocese of Raphoe in the
beginning of the sixteenth century. He was Menelaus MacCormac, and was
educated at Oxford, where, as Anthony Wood tells us, he went by the coe

Carmgan Hibernicus. After having been Dean of Raphoe for some years, he w
consecrated Bishop of that See, on the 16th of July, 1484, and when he had
fulfilled that high trust with distinguished zeal and ability for thirty-one years,
he died on the 9th of May, 1515. Before his death he begged to be clothed with
the habit of the order of St. Francis, and by his direction he was buried in the
Abbey of Donegal.

What remains at the present time of this famous Abbey is lamentably scanty.
Little though it be, it is, however, sufficient to enable us to determine that it was
a large cruciform building, with a central tower and graceful windows. Of the
cloisters, too, there is left a memorial of thirteen arches, which, with their support-
ing couplets of pillars, yet retain evidences of great beauty and variety of design,
and admirable execution. They are of the small size common in examples of
Irish monastic architecture. But though the material lineaments of this building
are fat sadly effaced, it has left an impress on Irish history indelible as that history
itself.


