--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-283.png ---
County of Down. 251

Tipermeni, Balmiechethe, Dunnovere, Balienlirnoni, Telagh-
methan, Balinbothan, Molrath, Kno, Chengar, Monenmor,
Nochenduf, Chemard, Tirgore, Tirestruther, Balioconevi,
Cremse, Crochbalindethdume, Balima, Celendre, Balmangatha,
Balinculter, Balmiackelli, Keloker, Balienscruthi, Balinzimur-
gam, Kelliohan, Baliowosan, Lesconan, Kortef, Cronoch,

teenth or fifteenth century, which was lent to him from the muniments of the See
of Down, which purports to be an extract from ancient documents read by the
Bishop of Down in the year 1210, before King John, and confirmed by that king.
It states “that the Bishop of Down is Abbot of the Convent of the Monks of the
Church of Down, and has the same pre-eminence over the Prior and the Convent
of St. Patrick as any other abbot has over hisown convent. And in the Church of
Down the same bishop has the half of all the oblations of that church and chapels
on the festivals of Easter, the Assumption of the Blessed Virgin Mary, and the
Nativity of the same, and on the festival of St. Patrick and of the Nativity of our
Lord. Item. He has in the same church on the north side a hall and kitchen,
with chambers above and beneath, and before the gate of the cloister a little passage
which leads to the lower chambers, and behind the said hall chambers on the north
side, towards the parish church of said city.” It would seem from this document
that the cloisters and cells were to the north of the Cathedral, which corresponds
with what Harris says—‘ Large pieces of stained glass and window lead have been
lately turned out of the ruins of the building; the glass but rudely painted and
scarce transparent, probably done in the infancy of the invention; but the lead was
like pewter, and far beyond any used in the present times. Several cells have been
discovered behind the abbey, one whereof was floored with small painted tiles, some-
thing like mosaic work, but the figures small and ill done.” On account of the
peculiar relations that existed between the Bishop and the Prior and Convent, the
election to the see on each vacancy rested with the Prior and Convent, subject to
the approbation of the king and the Pope; however, we shall find an attempt on
the part of the abbey of Bangor to set up a claim to that privilege. The Terrier
says:—‘‘ The Prior of the said Abby and Convent is Dean, and the monks of the
said Abby or Cathedral Church are Cannons Cathedrall, and, as it were, a Chapter.”
It is on this account that we do not meet in ancient documents reference to any
of the officers, usually connected with other dioceses, except the archdeacon.

In the year 1185 the relics of St. Patrick, St. Brigid, and St. Columbkille were
discovered in the Cathedral, in a spot where they had been concealed, lest they
might fall into the hands of the Danes. The following account is given of this
discovery :—It being well known that the three bodies were in Down, the bishop,
Malachy III., used to pray fervently to God that he would vouchsafe to point out
to him the particular place in which they were concealed. Ona certain night,
when praying in the Cathedral Church, he saw a light like a sunbeam traversing
the church, which stopped at acertain spot. Immediately procuring the necessary
implements, he dug in that spot, and found the three bodies, which he then put into
three boxes, and placed them again under ground. Having cgmmunicated this
discovery to John de Courcy, then Lord of Down, they sent messengers to Pope
Urban III., for the purpose of procuring the solemn translation of these relics to a
more dignified ofthe church. The Pope, agreeing to their request, sent as his
legate on the following year Cardinal Vivian, who had been in Downpatrick nine
years before. On his arrival the relics were solemnly translated to a more respect-
able part of the church, on the 9th of June, the festival of St. Columba. ey
were deposited in one monument, according to the well known distich given in the
Office of the Translation—

“ Nunc tres in Duno tumulo tumulantur in uno
Brigida, Patricius, atque Columba pius.”
“In Down three saints one grave do fill,
Patrick, Brigid, and Columbkille.”
Besides the Cardinal Legate there were present at this translation fifteen bishops,
together with abbots, deans, archdeacons, priors, and an innumerable con-

