--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-313.png ---
County of Down. 277

Kilclief ; at the entrance of the Lough of Strangford, and
six miles south-east of Downpatrick.

%8 Kilclief.—Kilclief (Cill-Cleithe, ‘‘the hurdle church”) seems to have
been so named from the materials of which it was constructed, or it may have
received its name from some peculiarity in its chancel-screen, which, according
to “ Cormack’s Glossary,” was named ‘‘ Cliath”—‘‘ Crand-Caingel” (the beam of
the chancel, or the rood-loft). Says the “Glossary,” ‘a beam hurdlet here, é.¢.,
a hurdle in the beam between laymen and clerics, after the likeness of the veil
of the Temple. for Cliath is its name.” Kilclief is one of the churches the erection
of which is attributed to St. Patrick and two of his disciples. Eugenius and
Niellus, who were brothers, were placed over it. If the original structure was
built of wattles and boards, it seems to have given place, at an early date. to a
stone church. The “ Four Masters” record that in the year 935 “ Cill-Cleithe
was plundered by the son of Barith, and the stone church (Doimhliacc) was burned,
and a great prey was carried out of it.” This Doimhliacc, which was burned by
the Danes, was evidently a building of stone, or, as the word signifies, ‘a house
of stones.” Kilclief, situated so near the sea, must have been much exposed to
predatory visits from the Danes. The ‘‘ Annals of the Four Masters” record that
in toot, “ Sitric, son of Amhlaeibh, set out on a predatory excursion into Ulidia,
in his ships ; and he plundered Kilcleithe and Inis-Cumsraigh (Inch), and carried
off many prisoners from both.” The lands of Kilclief, like those of the other
ancient churches, which once had their own bishops, but were afterwards absorbed
in the see of Down, became the property of the see, and about the year 1178, John
de Courcy confirmed the possession of Kircleth to the bishop, and conferred on
him the power of erecting it into a borough. There is preserved in the Chapter-
house, Westminster, a memorial forwarded to Henry IV., about 1410, from the
clergy and nobles of Down, in which they pray the king “ to considre the said
thraldome and tribute with the important werres upon your said liege people daily
continued both by see and land ; by see with Bretones and with Scottes of the oute
lles, which beth wt Irishmen enemyes of the land confedered—that is to say, wt
Oneyllebwye, O'Kane, Mcgwylyn, henry Oneylle, Con Oneylle, Mcgynnusse,
Mccartan, and the Offlynnes, whiche will in shorte time fynally and utterly woll
destroye youre said Earldome and peaple without that it be by youre moost
gracious Hieghnesse provided to send unto theym a certain of people to inhabite
and to defende youre saide grounde.” . . . Such was the state of the English
colony in the north of Ireland nearly three centuries after its establishment! To
this document are annexed the signatures and seals of the Bishop of Down, of the
Prior of Down, of the Archdeacon of Down, and of the Abbots of Bangor, Saul, Inch,
Greyabbey, and of the town of * Kilcleth.” The seals of the Master of the Hospital
of St. John the Baptist, of George “ Russhel,” Baron, and of the towns of Down
and of Ardglass have broken off. The seal of the town of Kilclief (Ville de Kil-
cleth) exhibits an ancient galley in full sail.

Walter de la Hay returns the rents of the see lands in Kilclief which had been
received by him during four months in the year 1305 as amounting to £15 Ios.,
though he makes no return of the reaping which would be performed in Autumn
by the tenants, and which was valued at 3:. 4¢. per annum. The church of Kil-
clief was valued in the Pope Nicholas taxation at the large sum of twelve marks,
which was equal to the valuation of five or six of the ordinary churches of the diocese.
This church was dedicated to St. Caylan who probably was the Caylan who founded
Neddrum. The “ Terrier,” a document written in 1615, in enumerating the see lands
says :— In Kilclief 5 plowlands, and the Archdeacons of Downes part of the Ist 5

lowlands, this is the gift of the Bishop. The Earl of Kildare hath part of the said
land (as he alledgeth) thro’ gift of the Bishop and the other part he detains (viz. )
the towne of Lisbane, between Kilcliefe and Strangford. Certain other farmers
here have parte of this lande aforesaid for annual Rent of which Nicholas Fitz-
simons is one.” The tenants’ names given in the margin are Nicholas Fitzsimons,
James Dowdall, and Roger McNigh, his tenant. In 1622 the church is returned
as a ruin, though in 1592, in order to determine a Chancery suit pending between
the Archdeacon of Down and one Fitzsimons, respecting the glebe lands of Kil-
clief, an arbitration arranged that the Archdeacon should hold the lands, not as

