--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-305.png ---
County of Down. 269

seated on a rock, still remain ; this castle is said to have been
built by Sir John de Courcey for Knights Templars, who pos-
sessed it till the year 1313, when that order was abolished ; it
was afterwards granted to the prior of Down, who held the
same, with a small manor adjoining, till the final suppression
of religious houses.®
The reversion of this house and manor, with the yearly rent
of £6 135. 4d. reserved out of the premises, was granted to
Gerald Earl of Kildare ; see Lismullen in county of Meath.
This castle was granted to the family of Magennis; on their
forfeiture, it became the property of the Earl of Ardglass, and
afterwards was in the possession of the Lord Viscount Blun-
dell.! The ruins are of an irregular multangular form, with a fine
round tower which is about 35 feet in diameter in the inside®
Enachelte ;® The church of this name was founded in the
territory of Hibhethach® by St. Molibba.! It is now unknown.
Erynagh; in the barony of Lecale, and a mile and a half
south of Downpatrick ; here we find a celebrated well, dedi-

° Hist. County of Down, p.14.and 267. ‘Id.,p.14. © Pococke’s Journal. © The
baronies of Lveagh. * Act., SS., pp. 368.

of Kildare. The old Castle of Dundrum took a part in most of the bloody scenes
of those troublesome times. In 1517 Gerald, the ninth Earl of Kildare, then Lord
Deputy, marched into Lecale and took by storm Dundrum, which was then in the
hands of the Irish, who had some time before seized it from the English. Itagain
fell into the hands of the Magenises, and was re-taken by the Lord Deputy Gray,
with seven other castles in Lecale, in the year 1538. It was fortified by the cele-
brated Shane O’Neill in 1566. At the end of that century it was in the hands of
Phelim M‘Ivir Magenis, who was obliged to yield it to Lord Mountjoy in the year
1601. Phelomy M‘Arton, in 1605, made over to Lord Cromwell “ the Castle of
Dondrome” with “ the third parte of all that his countrie called Killinarte (Kine-
larty), or in Watertirrye or elsewhere in Co. Doune.” From the Cromwell family
it passed by purchase to Viscount Blundell, from whom it descended to the Mar-

wis of Downshire, its present proprietor. The castle was finally dismantled about
the year 1652. The ruins consist of a great circular keep or tower, surrounded by
towers and outworks, Father Edmund MacCana, in his “Irish Itinerary,” says
that the castle is built upon the top of a very pleasant hill, “at the base of which
the sea forms a bay, where the tide on going out leaves a remarkable strand called
Traig-na-trenfhior—that is, ‘the shore of the champions,’ for here it was that the
outh of the ancient Ultonians used to exercise themselves in the race and wrest-
ing.” No traces of a chapel exist at Dundrum.

Enachelte,—In a list of Metropolitan Procurations imposed on the Diocese of
Dromore in the year 1422 the church of “ Enaceilte” is valued at 1 mark. It is now
called Anahilt, and gives name to a parish in the diocese of Dromore. The patron
saint is commemorated at the 18th of February in the Calendars of Aengus and of
the O’Clery’s—‘ Molibba of Eanach-eilte in Iveagh of Ulidia.” The burying-ground
about the church is of great antiquity, and the fort in which it stands is curious,
being the innermost of four enclosures which include at least nine acres, and slope
to the east in a regular glacis. It,had formerly a morass on three sides, and must,
previous to the invention of cannon, have been a place of great strength. To this
Post oa Phelim O’Neill retreated in 1641, when repulsed at Lisburn by Sir John

wdon,

9 Erynagh.—The Monastery of Erynagh was situate in the townland of that
name, in the parish of Bright. Here, in a field called ‘*The Church Park,”
about 200 yards to the right of the road from Corbally to Grangecarn, were

