--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-176.png ---
150 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

Ward's MS. History of the Irish Franciscan Convents, written in 1632, gives
some further details regarding the house of that order in Youghal : ‘‘ The convent
of Youghal, which was called the Mother of the Irish Franciscan Province, was
built in the year 1224. In the year 1583 it was destroyed and depopulated, some
of the friars having been taken and put to death by the English Protestants. It
remained desolate till the year 1627, when a residence was built in the town, and
Father Francis Mede was appointed its first superior. The first founder of the convent
was Maurice Fitzgerald, fom whom sprung the Earls of Kildare and Desmond,
the Barons of Lixnaw, and several other most noble families. He was for many
years Lord Justiciary of Ireland, and headed an army against the Scots in aid of
the King of England. The war being victoriously concluded, he returned home,
distributed his possessions to his children, and became a Franciscan friar. He
lived till the year 1257, distinguished for profound humility and holiness of life,
and died, and was buried in the convent. There are, from ancient times, the tombs of
the Earls of Desmond, the Lords of Desies, and several other nobles of the same
family and country. At the right hand side of the altar in the convent, a certain
friar is buried whose tomb is illustrated by miracles: and also another friar, who
was put to death by the heretics, lies buried in the same place.”

From Hayman’s “‘ Ecclesiastical Notes and Records,” and other authorities, we
lean the following additional particulars regarding the religious foundations of
‘oughal :—

1542.3 Aug. The Lord Deputy and Council agreed that a Commission
should issue to James, fifteenth Earl of Desmond, and others, to take inventories
for the King’s use of all the religious houses in the counties of Limerick, Cork,
Kerry, and Desmond, to dissolve the said houses, and put them into safe custody.
(Smith’s Cork, vol. ii. p. 40). When the Franciscan brethren were removed from
their house, they withdrew to Curraheen, county Waterford, three-quarters of a
mile from Aglish, and about eight from Youghal, a lonely and retired spot among
the mountains, where they were protected and re-established by the Fitzgeralds of
Dromana. At Curraheen they erected a new Friary.

1578.—10 Sept. By an Inquisition taken at Cork on this day it appeared that
William White, long after the statute of mortmain, granted to the Church of the
Holy Trinity, Cork, the rectory of Clere in that county, which rectory at the
taking of the Inquisition, was in the possession of the guardian of the Franciscan
Friary of Youghal, and was of the annual value of 12 pence.—(Inquisitions of
Record in Exchequer). -

1585.—Among the MSS. in the Library of Trinity College, Dublin, is a col-
lection of ‘‘ Maps and Charts relating to Ireland,” one of which is a very inter-
esting pictorial Plan of Youghal of this date. The Franciscan Friary is well
represented ; it is called ‘‘ The Abbey on the So. West of ye Town,” and, by the
scale, it is distant 200 paces from the south gate. In its outward presentment it
rather resembles a feudal fortress than a Friary.

1597-8.—24 Jan, This Friary was granted, by letters patent, to George Isham,
gent. along with the following : Ten acres of land of the small measure, with the

hapel of St. Anne near Yoghal, and one acre of land; the townlands of
Rathnolan, Knocknagippee, and Curraghmonevore, in said county, containing one
carucate and a half; with other grants in the counties of Waterford and Limerick,
at the annual rent of £8 175. 10d.

1602.—10 Sept. By an Inquisition taken at Youghal, the Monastery of St.
Francis, near the town of Youghel, commonly called Le Grey Friary de Youghell,
was found to belong to the Queen.

1603.—13 Sept. The site, circuit and precinct of the late Monastery, or re-
Tigious house of the Friars Mendicant or Begging Friars, commonly called The
Grey Friars near Yoghall, with one park or close, called John Mahowne’s Parke,
containing arable 2 acres, near Yoghall, rent 12d. Irish, was granted to James
Fullerton, gent.—(Calendar of Patent Rolls : 1 Jac. I. p- 7)

1603.—7 Nov. Sir James Fullerton disposed of his title to the premises in-
cluded in the foregaing grant, as well to the Abbey of Molana, for £219 6s. 8d.
Irish money, to Sir Richard Boyle.

160§.—20 June. The site and precinct of this Friary, with 10 acres small
measure thereto belonging, were granted by the King to Donagh, Earl of
Thomond.—(Calendar of Patent Rolls, 3 Jac. I. pp. 79, 80).

