--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-232.png ---
200 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

Kilmacrenan 6 on the river Gannon, though now a poor
depopulated village, yet it gives name to the barony.

who is better able to give you accurate information about everything, wherefore I
send him to Rome for atwo-fold purpose—1. To give you intelligence about my-
self, as well as about the bishops and archbishops, &c.; and 2. That as the Bishop
of Raphoe has lately been taken away from us, I know of no better suited to be his
successor; he is very learned according to the style of literature of this country, and
he is beloved by every one; he moreover spent some time in Rome last year.” With
Dr. MacConghail the Apostolic Delegate sent Dr. Crean and Dr. O’Hart, the
former to be raised to the see of Elphin, and the latter to the see of Achonry, In
the letter of introduction which he gave them the following passage occurs: —‘‘ The
name of the secular priest is Donald Macgongaill ; he is a man well versed in the
affairs of this nation, and I wish your Excellency would command him, in virtue of
holy obedience, to make known to you how Donatus, Archbishop of Armagh, and
the other prelates of this country deport themselves. . . . I will add no more,
as I leave everything in the hands of Donald.” Shortly after his arrival in the
Eternal City, Dr. MacConghail was consecrated Bishop of Raphoe, and at once he
proceeded to Trent where he threw himself into the deliberations of the Fathers of
the Council with great zeal, and rendered efficient aid in framing their decrees.
His name is set downin the catalogue of the Fathers with the epithet yusf attached,
and he is described as young in years but old in the practice of every virtue. In
the record of the voting he is always on the side of strict discipline. On his
return to Ireland he worked energetically for the immediate promulgation of
the decrees of the great Council in which he had taken such a distinguished part, and
was one of the leading spirits in a provincial synod convened in 1587 for that
object. There was no prelate in Ireland in those trying times that so much impressed
the public mind. This is set forth very distinctly in a manuscript in the British
Museum, where he is mentioned in these eulogistic terms:— ‘‘ He was the third great
bishop that was in the Council of Trent; he was an active and a well-qualified
man; he could write well, and speak both the Latin, English, and Irish tongues;
commonly he accompanied O'Donnell when he came to Dublin before the State ; he
dealt much for the business of the church, and at length he obtained letters under my
Lord Deputy Sir Henry Sydney's and the Council’s hands for the immunity of his
church, that neither English or Irish should have cess or press upon the church lands,
and ifany number of persons should offend contrary to the Lord Deputy and Council’s
order established in that behalf, that such delinquent shall pay into the church ten-
fold as much as should be thus wrongfully exacted.” The Four Masters tell us
that Dr. MacConghail surrendered his distinguished and useful life at Killybegs on
the 2gth of September, 1589. There is no stone to mark where he sleeps, no
monument in marble or brass to record his great deeds—a disgrace which, it is to
be hoped, will not continue long. There is an old ruin, with a decayed and disused
cemetery attached, not far from Killybegs, which are pointed out as the resting-
piace of the great bishop ; but local tradition is the only means we have of identi-
ying it. Sad result indeed! !
1S Ktlmacrenan.—This name is a modification of the old Irish Kill-mic-Nenain,
by which it is known in our ecclesiastical records. Nenain was brother-in-
law of St. Columkille, and father of four sons, all of whom died in the odour of
sanctity. He was lord or chieftain of this territory, resided at Kilmacrenan,
and largely endowed the abbey and church built there by his saintly relative.
Around this ecclesiastical establishment grew up rapidly, as was usual in those
times, a considerable town, which was called Kill-mic-Nenain in recognition of
the pious munificenee of Nenain. Nowhere perhaps in Ireland is the lesson of
fallen greatness taught more thoroughly than at Kilmacrenan. _It was the foster-
place of the great St. Collumkille, and, to mark his affection for it, he founded
there a large and important monastery. Of this the only thing left now is
a slender tower, pierced with one or two pointed windows and some few
ieces of crumbling walls. The O’Donnell’s, to whose family Saint Columkille
longed, always cherished a special regard for Kilmacrenan, and built there a
Franciscan Friary: it is now a Protestant church, with a fragment of sculpture
inserted in the wall over the principal door, representing the head of an abbot or

