--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-226.png ---
194 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

Inver 5“ on the sea-shore, in the barony of Boylagh and
Bannagh, and five miles east of Killybegs.

St. Natalis, who died A.D. 563, was abbot of Inbernaile in
Tyrconnell, and also of Kilnaile, in Breffiny, and of Daminis,
or Devenish."

' Tr. Th., p. 169.

Hebrides, among the Northern Picts, and away south beyond the mountains, over
the Lowlands, and into Northumbria. Amidst all these labours he found time
for the cultivation of letters ; and his litera: roductions, are a title only second
to his imperishable services in the cause of , to the gratitude and veneration
of mankind. He is said to have built three hundred houses devoted to God's
service, which have survived to the present day, and are even now specimens of
marvellously fine workmanship. Adamnan, his biographer has left us the portrait
ofhim. ‘Angelic in appearance, eloquent in address, holy in work, with talents
of the highest order, and consummate prudence, he lived a soldier of Christ
during thirty-five years in his adopted island (Iona). fe never could spend
the space of even one hour without study or prayer, or writing, or some other
holy occupation ; and soincessantly was he engaged night and day,in the unwearied
exercise of watching, and of corporal austerities, that the weight of his singular
labour would seem beyond the power of human endurance, and still he was
beloved by all, for a holy joy ever beaming in his face revealed ecstasies with
which the Holy Spirit filled his inmost soul.”

1 Jnver, known in Irish ecclesiastical history as /ader-Natle, from St. Naalis or
Nataiis, who governed a monastery here, and distinguished himself so much by
his sanctity of life that he is still remembered in the traditions of the people, and
has given his name to the most extensive parish in the diocese of Raphoe. St.
Naalis is thus commemorated in the Martyrology of Donegal :—‘‘ Naalis sive
Natalis de Inber Naile Abbas fuit de Kill-Naile et Dominisensis postea, Ejus
meritis Deus indulsit ut aquam e dura produxerit petra. Cum enim ipse et
Maidocus Fernensis cum eorum discipulis die quadam magnis sitis cepissent

remi augustiis, vir sanctus baculo suo feriit perduram petram, et ex ea aqua viventis
Pavia elicuit : fons autem ille hodie visitur Kilnaliz.”

The Saint was of royal blood, for his mother was the daughter of the king of
Leinster, and his father was Aengus, king of Leinster. The latter received his
baptism from the hands of St. Patrick, and during the ceremony he is said to have
given signal proof of fervour and recollection. The Saint, while engaged in
the administration of the sacrament, let the sharp end of his crozier rest upon the
ground ; in its descent it fell upon the king’s foot and pierced it. The pain was
excruciating, but the king moved not nor winced till the ceremony had ended.
Colgan, in his Acta Sanctorum, under January 27th, gives a brief sketch of St.
Naalis :—‘‘ There are not wanting,” he says, ‘‘other very weighty testimonies of the

eat sanctity of St. Natalis or Naalis, and the solemn venerafion formerly paid to
fim in different parts of this kingdom. For some of our menologies relate that he,
by merit, derived the fountain of his faith from the rock, and that he is venerated
on the 27th of January with solemn festivity, and the honour due to a patron, at
three places where he discharged the office of abbot. These places are the church
of Jnber-Naile, in the county of Tirconnell, the church of A#/-Naile, in the
territory of Breffny (Fermanagh), and the monastery of Damsh-inis, in the govern-
ment of which he is said to have succeeded St. Molassius. He was the son of
Aengus, king of Munster, and of Athnea, the daughter of Crumthen, king of
Leinster.” No one at present can point out even the spot on which this monastery
stood. Its ultimate fate is best known from an Inquisition taken at Lifford in
the 7th of James I—‘‘ The jurors, upon their oathes, say and present that in the
saide baronie (Tirew) is also the parish of Zmivernaile, containing in all three
ballybetaghs, whereof Loses is churchland and now in the possession of
the Busshop of Raphoe, and that the usual rent thereof is fiftie meathers of butter,
and thirteen shillings and foure pence Irish in monie.” From the time that the
monastery and its lands were thus confiscated the ecclesiastical establishment of
St. Naalis has dropped out of notice, at least as regards the people of Tirconnell

