--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-152.png ---
126 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

John de Barry, supposed to be John Keltagh Barry, and
styled the Lord John Barry of Hely, who was basely mur-
dered in the year 1327,¢ did, together with John Fitz-
Gilbert, and Philip Fitz-Robert, grant several carucates and
parcels of land, tithes, and advowsons of churches, to Agnes
de Hereford and other women, to serve God in the habit
of nuns, in the house of St. John the Baptist, in St. John’s-
street, within the suburbs of Cork.®

This nunnery, of which there are now no remains, was
situated near the present market-house, and the site was
accidently discovered in digging up some old tombs.*

Preceptory; there was a preceptory of the Knight’s Tem-
plars in this town, for we find that William le Chaplain
was master of Cork about the year 1292.8

Priory of St. Stephen ;® An house was founded in the
south suburbs of this city for the support of Lepers, and
Edward Henry was keeper of it A.D. 1295.

1408. November 22nd, Henry IV. granted the custody of
this house, then vacant and in his gift, to Henry Fygham,
chaplain, for life ;} and November 22nd, 1419, it was re-
granted to another Henry Fygham during life* This priory,
when suppressed, was granted to the city of Cork, and about
the year 1674, an hospital for poor children, now called the
Blue-coat Hospital, was erected on the ancient site.! :

Christ Church ; otherwise called the Church of the Holy
Trinity.

Inquisition roth September, XX Queen Elizabeth, finds
that a chantry was founded in this church for the support of
eight priests ; to which, contrary to the statute of mortmain,
the following grants were made: by James White, the Church
of St. Laurens in this city, with three messuages adjacent
thereto, annual value, besides reprises, 3s. 4¢.; by James
Milton, a carucate of land near Cork, in the tenure of James
Meagh, annual value 6s.; and by Philip Golde, a college, built
of stone, near Christ Church, annual value, besides re-
prises, 6s.

4 Lodge, vol. 1, p. 196. * Dugdale, vol. 2, p. 1020. * Smith, vol. 1, p. 389. © King,
D on Id. p. 139. | Harris’s Collect. vol. 4, * King, p. 139. ' Smath, vol. 1,
P. 389.
titled when on the toad to Cork, that the master of the honpitalskouldy forthe
space of twenty-four hours, maintain and support all the horsemen and footmen
attending the said Cormac, his heirs and assigns, with victuals, and all necessaries,
in consideration of which the said master claimed housefoot, and firefoot out of
the woods of said Cormac for the support, repairing, and re-edifying of the hospital
when necessary. The master was seized of the advowsons Aghnynagh and the

rectory of the parish churches of Mucrumphe and Clounadrohide, and the patron-
age of the parish church of Moyviddy and Kilkollinan.

