--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-093.png ---
County of Clare. 73

dowed the abbey. This charter was dated at Limerick in
1195, and witnessed by M., archbishop of Cashell, D., bishop
of Killaloe, A., bishop of Fenabore, and B., bishop of
Limerick.*

A great battle was fought here in the year 1278, by Donell,
son of Teige Caoluiske O’Brien, accompanied by the two
septs of O'Coilen, with the tribe of Fearmaic and Owney,
against Mahon O’Brien, who was defeated with a great
slaughter.¢

Thady, bishop of Killaloe, exemplified King Donald’s
ancient charter in this monastery on 18th July, 1461.°

In 1543, King Henry VIII. granted the abbey to the baron
of Ibrachan,‘ together with a moiety of the rectories of Kil-
chriest, Kilmoyle, Kilmacdevan, Kilberverragh, Ballinregdan,
Ballylogheran, and Ballylegford& This abbey was granted
in Fee to Donough, Earl of Thomond, January roth, 1620,
and a new grant was made, September Ist, 1661, to Henry,
Earl of Thomond.

Corcumroe,'* a small village in the barony of Burren, it was
thrice plundered by Rotheric O'Connor and Dermot O’Brien,
in the year 1088.*

A.D. 1194. Donald, King of Limerick, founded a sump-
tuous monastery here for Cistertian Monks, and dedicated it
to the Virgin Mary;! others say that Donagh Carbrac, his
son, was the founder, in the year 1200. This abbey was also
called the abbey of the Fruitful Rock, and was a daughter of
that of Suire; it was afterwards made subject to the celebrated
abbey of Furnes, in Lancashire; the cell of Kilsonna, alias

°King, p. 203. *Annal. Munst, *King, p.203. ‘Cox, vol.t.p.276. "Auditor
Gen. Office, “Rolls. ‘Wascalledanciently Corcamruadh. *Ann, Munst. ‘Liber
rubr, de Kilken,

3 The Abbey of Corcumroe was situated in the townland of Abbey, and parish
of Abbey, in the barony of Burren, about eighteen miles north-west from the town
of Ennis, and about five miles from the town of Ballyvoughan.

This abbey, though situated in the present barony of Burren, is always called
the Abbey of Corcumroe, i.¢., the abbey of the territory of Corcumroe, which
comprised the entire of the diocese of Kilfenora. It gives name to the townland
and parish of Abbey, in the barony of Burren.

In the Casthreim Toirdhealbaig la wars of Thomond), at the year 1267, it is
called the Abbey of Burren. Its church, which was built in a beautiful style, is
still in good preservation. Its chancel contains a monument to the memory of
Peter O’Loughlin the last prince of Burren, and a tomb having a full-size figure of
Conor na Sudaine O'Brien, King of Thomond, who was killed by O’Loughlen of
Burren, in the year 1267, in the battle of Sudain in Gleann-Aragach (now Glen-
araga), at Beal-an-Chlogaid, at the head of Pouldoody, and interred in this Abbey.
See “‘Annals of the Four Masters,” A.D. 1514, #.a. See a sketch of this Abbey,
and of the monument of Conor O’Brien, King of Thomond, in the ‘‘ Dublin Penny
Journal” for 1834, p. 341, where it is erroneously called the tomb of ‘‘ Donogh

Brien.’

