--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-201.png ---
175

COUNTY OF DONEGALL.

Astrath;! On the river Erne, near the town of Bally-
shannon’

A.D. 1178. An abbey was founded here for monks of the
Cistertian order! by Roderick O’Cananan, Prince of Tyrcon-
nell; he was slain in battle by O’Flachertach, who succeeded

° it was called anciently Ashro, Easroe, and Easruadh, and also the Abbey de
Samario, * Pembridge’s Annals.

1 Astrath, or Asharoe, is the name of a waterfall close to Ballyshannon. The
origin of the name belongs to a very remote date. The “Annals of the Four
Masters” set it down at the year of the world 4518, and give the following account
of it :—‘‘ Aedh Ruadh, son of Rodbarn, after he had been (the third time that he
assumed the government) seven years in the sovereignty of Ireland, was drowned
in Eas Ruadh, and buried in the mound over the margin of the cataract ; so that
from him Sith-Aedha and Aes-Aedhaire are called.” The cataract in which this ill-
fated prince, dedh Ruadh, lost his life, was from that time called Eas Aedh Ruadh,
now contracted into Asharoe, that is, the cataract of Red Hugh, for Zas isa
cataract, Aedh or ce is Hugh, and Ruadk or Rua is Red. This cataract is the
celebrated Fall of Ballyshannon, where the whole body of the river Erne is pro-
jected over a cliff of from fourteen to sixteen feet high. The salmon on their way
from the sea, rise there fourteen or fifteen feet at a spring, and bound up that
raging flood-gate. Sith-Aedha, that is, the grave of Aedha or Hugh, was the
name given to “the mound over the margin of the cataract” in which the body
was buried after it had been recovered. It is now Mullaghnashee, with a modern
English star-fort, erected in 1798, on the old mound or grave. The fate of this
Prince, and its consequences, head one of the most interesting chapters in the
romance of Irish history. Some three hundred years or more before the Christian
era, three cousins, the sons of three brothers, claimed each for himself the king-

- ship of Erinn. The dispute, however, was adjusted by the Fi/es, or Druids, who
engaged the three claimants in a solemn compact by which each should be allowed
to reign in turn for a period of seven years. Their names were Dithorba, Aedh-
Ruadh, and Cimbaeth, and they lived on amicably until each had enjoyed his
turn of the sovereignty three times, when Aedh-Ruadh was drowned in this cataract.
Aedh left but one child, a daughter, by name Macha Mongruadh, or Macha the
Red-haired. She claimed her father’s right to the seven years’ reign when his
turn came round, but the co-sovereigns refused to allow this privilege to a woman.
Whereupon, the strong-minded Macha raised an army, and, after a fierce contest,
made good her claim by force of arms. Dithorba having been slain in the con-
test, and his five sons banished into the wilds of Connaught, the victorious
Macha completed her triumph by marrying the remaining co-sovereign, Cimbaeth.
As, however, danger was still possible from the sons of Dithorba, this energetic
lady of the golden hair set out in quest of those luckless Youths, and did not give
over the pursuit until she had captured them among the rocks of the distant
Burran. te was suggested to her to put them to death, but she was pleased to
grant them their lives on the condition of their becoming her slaves, and she gave
them for a task to build her a court, ot rath, which should be thereafter the
chief residence of the princes of Ulster. The queen took a golden brooch, or
bodkin, with which she used to fasten her cloak round her neck, and traced out
with it the foundations of the court at a place about two miles west of Armagh ;
and thus was begun the palace of Eomuin, from Ze, a breastpin or brooch, and
Muin, the neck. Eomuin, Latinised into Emania, was the resort of the celebrated
Red-branch Knights, and the palace of the kings of Ulster for more than eight
hundred years. .

The abbey got its name from the waterfall, and is within easy distance of it.
There is, however, some difference of opinion as to its exact situation. Some

