--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-099.png ---
County of Clare. 79

river Shannon, between Limerick and the island of Inis
Scattery.®

St. Senan of Corca Baiscin founded a monastery here
before the coming of St. Patrick into Munster,» and St.
Moronoc, called the Penitentiary of Inisluaidhe, had a cell
here at the time of St. Senan’s death!

Inisegananagh, or the island of Canons, in the river Shan-
non, near the principality of Thomond; Donald O’Brien,
King of Limerick, in the 12th century, founded, or rebuilt, a
priory here, for canons regular following the rule of St.
Augustin.

In a rental of the crown estate in the year 1577, the crown
was then seized, in right of this abbey, of the farm of the
island, viz., four acres of arable, fourteen of mountain and pas-
ture, and the site of the said abbey, containing half an acre,
a church, &c., three other islands called Inishorlth, Iniskeirke,
and Inistubred, near the said island of Canons; the land
called Iniskedragh, not far from the river of Galway, con-
taining thirteen acres of mountain; also two parts of the
tithes of the rectory of Kildysirt Murhull, and the vicarage of
Kilchrist in Thomond.!

The moiety of the said abbey of canons and that of Clare,
and the moiety of the churches of Kilchrist, Killonyle, alias
Killennoyle, Kilmadovane, alias Kiluichdowen, Killoveragh,
Ballymacegan, alias Ballymacregan, Ballyloghbran, and Bally-
loghfadela, and the chapel of Killowe, with all their tithes
and profits; and the tithes of the demesne and lands of the
said abbey were granted, in fee, to Donough, Earl of Thomond,
June 20th, 1605, and confirmed to him March 8th, 1609; they
were again granted in fee to Henry Earl of Thomond, Sep-
tember Ist, 1661."

Inisscattery, >“ a rich and beautiful little island in the mouth
of the river Shannon.

8Act. SS. p. 540. O'Halloran’s Hist. vol. 2. p. 44. ‘Act. SS. p. 540.

*War. Mon. ‘Auditor Gen. Office. ™Rolls, “Was anciently called Iniscatty,
Iniscathuigh, and Cathiana.

4 The island of jn1Ip Cotas (Lats Cahy ), now called Scattery Island and Inis-
scattery, is situated in the river Shannon, near the town of Kilrush, about two
miles Lom the shore, and is remarkable for the remains of several churches and
around tower of great antiquity. A church was founded here by St. Senan, a
bishop, about the year 540. See “ Lanigan’s Ecclesiastical History of Ireland,” vol.
ii., pp. 2-7. It continued to be the seat of a bishop till about this period (1188),
when it seems to have been united to the see of Limerick. Ussher, however,
who thought that it owed its origin to Saint Patrick, informs us that its possessions
were divided between the sees of Limerick, Killaloe, and Ardfert: ‘‘ Atque hic
notandum, Patricium in metropoli Armachana successore relicto, ad alias ecclesias
constituendas animum adjecisse ; in quibus sedes ilia episcopalis fuit in Sinei
(SHANAN) fluminis alveo /nis Catti et eodem sensu in provinciali Romano /nsula
Cathag appellata. Is episcopatus inter Limericensem, Laonensem, et Ardfer-

