--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-184.png ---
158 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

Chantry ,® in the south wing of the church of Youghal was
founded the chantry of our Blessed Saviour," and John
Welsh, long after the statute of mortmain, endowed it with
sundry lands, to the annual value of 6s. Irish money. Inquisi-
tion roth September, 20th Queen Elizabeth.—Chief Rem.

mD Smith, vol. 1, p. 119.

The question remains to be determined, to what community did this ancient
Monastery belong? The most aged peasants dwelling around, say it was Augus-
tinian, and are probably right. Friar Lubin, in his valuable history of that order,
gives us a map of Ireland, specifying the localities where houses of the order
existed. In Munster, we have at the mouth of the Blackwater ‘ Yoalensis’ marked,
along with the adjoining monasteries of Ardmore, Lismore and Dungarvan ; but
the historian gives us no particulars. Now, we have identified every other local
religious foundation, and do not find among them the house of Augustinians ; why
may it not be sought for here? It is true, that the able compiler of the Irish
Monasticon, printed in London by William Mears, in 1722, denies the correctness
of Lubin’s statement ; and speaking of monasteries erroneously assigned to Augus-
tinians, he says (p. 323): ‘‘ Youghill Monastery is likewise only of the aforesaid
Ffriar Lubin’s discovering, without mentioning the founder, or the time of its
foundation ; and I am well assured that there never were any convents of religious
men at Youghil, besides those of the Dominicans and Franciscans.” But the writer
previously (p. 311) had admitted a self-evident truth, which must weigh with us
In receiving his authority, especially when so dogmatically given : ‘‘It is possible,”
he writes, ‘‘that Friar Lubin might have had some informations which are un-
known to me.”

3° Chantry ; In the south wing of the collegiate church in this town was the
chapel of St. Saviour; and an Inquisition, 20th May, 27th Elizabeth, finds
that John Bennet. called Bishop Bennet, being seized in fee, to him and
his heirs, of a messuage in this town, called Bennet’s great house, near the
gate on the north side of the town, of the annual value of 6¢., Irish money,
besides reprises, and of a “oft adjoining the said messuage, which /o/f runs
from that messuage on the north to the land called Uniak’s land on the south, and
from the town wall on the east to the street called the Common street on the
west, and is of the annual value, besides reprises, of 4¢., Irish ; also another
toft adjoining the said /oft, and stretching from Uniak’s land on the north, to
Coppinger’s land on the south, and from the town wall on the east to the said street
on the west of the town, and is of the annual value, besides reprises, of 4d., Irish;
also a large garden without the town walls, and not far from the north gate
running from the abbey lands on the north to the street on the south called the
Commonlane ; and from the highway on the east to the land called Galians on the
west. and is of the annual value, besides reprises, of 4d; also another garden in the
Church lane, stretching from the said lane on the north, Uniak’s land on the south,
and from the land lately the Earl of Desmond's on the east, to the college lands on
the west, and is of the annual value, besides reprises, of 4¢.; also a garden and a
wall on the north of the Churchlane, stretching on the north from Collyn’s land
to the land of the Church on the west, and from Patrick Walshe’s lane on the east
to the said land of the earl of Desmond on the west, and is of the annual value,
besides reprises, of 4d.; also a messuage called Morresses * * * * house,
with a small messuage annexed thereto, stretching from Arthur’s lands in the north
to Liston’s land in the south, and from the town wall on the east to the Common-
street of the town on the south, and is of the annual value, besides reprises, of 25.;
also two messuages near the Keylane, which stretch from the said Keylane on the
north to the lands called Annias’ lands on the south, and from the town wall on
the east to the street called the Common-street, and is of the annual value, beside
reprises, of 2s.; and also a park or close lying between the hospital for the sick
poor, and the land called Collins’ park, and is of the annual value, besides
reprises, of 4¢. And the said John Bennet being seized of the messuages, &c.,
did long after the statute of mortmain, and without obtaining the royal licence


