--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-044.png ---
26 Ancient Monasteries of Iretand.

Priory of Regular Canons. A.D. 445. St. Patrick, the
great apostle of this kingdom, founded an abbey here in this

Armagh is translated by A/titudo-Mache, as in the ‘Book of Armagh,” some-
times by A/to-Macha, and sometimes simply Macha, or Machi. Out of the high
ground known by this name rose an eminence called Druim Sailech, the ‘Ridge of
Sallow,” rendered Dorsum Salicis in the ‘‘Book of Armagh.” In the note (p)
Archdall gives Eamhuin-Macha as one of the names of Armagh; but, in reality,
this was the name of the entrenchment in the parish of Eglish, now known as the
Navan fort. This was for six hundred years the regal abode of the Ulster sovereigns,
whose line ended in Fergus Focha, who fell at Achalethderg, in A.D. 332. In that
year Eamhain was burned and laid waste, and was never inhabited again. It after-
wards became the property of the church of Armagh. In 577 Tigernach records
Primum periculum Uladh in Emania, in 578 Abreversio Uladh de Emania. In
1145 a limekiln, which was sixty feet every way, was erected opposite Eamhain
Macha, by Gillamacliag, successor of Patrick, and ‘‘by Patrick’s clergy in general.”
Under 1387 the ‘‘ Four Masters” have these two entries: ‘A house was built at
Eamhain Macha by Niall O’Neill, King of Ulster, for the entertainment of the leamed
men of Ireland.

«A house was erected at Eamhain Macha, by Niall O’Neill, for there was not
any house within it for a long time till then.” Dr. Reeves gives (p. 38, 39) the
text of two documents from ‘‘ Primate Sweteman’s Register” on matters connected
with Navan.

2. The ‘‘ Annals of Ulster” refer the foundation of Armagh to A.D. 444: “ A.D.
444 Ardmacha fundata est. Ab urbe condita usque ad hanc urbem fundatam
MCXCIV.”

The ‘‘Annals of the F. M.” refer it to the year 457, at which they say :—‘‘ Ard-
Macha was founded by Saint Patrick, it having been granted to him by Daire, son
of Finnchadh, son of Eoghan, son of Niallan. Twelve men were appointed by
him for building the town. He ordered them, in the first place, to erect an arch-
bishop’s city there, and a church for monks, for nuns, and for the other orders in
general, for he perceived that it would be the head and chief of the churches of
Treland in general.”

3. The following most interesting extract from the ‘‘ Book of Armagh” contains
the history of the earliest religious foundations at Armagh. It will be seen from it
that the so-called abbey was not the first foundation made by St. Patrick, that
honour belonging clearly to the church of the Ferta :—

«There lived in the territory of the Easterns a man both rich and honourable,
whose name was Daire, and Patrick asked of him to grant a place for the exercise
of his religion, and the rich man said to the saint, what place dost thou desire?
I pray of thee [said Patrick] to bestow upon me that eminence which is called the
Sallow Ridge, and there I will build mea place. Notwithstanding, he would not
grant to the saint that high ground, but he gave him another portion in a lower
situation, where is now the Fertce Martyrum, beside Arddmacha; and there Patrick
abode with his disciples. Some time after there came a horseman of Daire, leading
his fine horse to feed upon the grassy ground of the Christians, and Patrick was
offended at the intrusion of the horse on his ground, and said, Daire had done
foolishly in sending a senseless animal to trespass on the little spot which he
granted to God. But the horseman, as one that is deaf, gave no ear; and, as adumb
man that openeth not his mouth, gave no reply; but letting loose the horse there, went
his way for the night. But when, early on the following morning, he came to look
after the horse, he found him already dead, and returning home in sorrow, he said
to his master, behold that Christian hath killed thy horse, because he was dis-
pleased at the trespass upon his ground. And Daire said, then he likewise shall
die; therefore go ye and kill him instantly. But scarcely was the word uttered,
while they were yet going out when a dcath-stroke fell upon Daire. Then said
his wife, it is because of the Christian that this hath come to pass. Let some one
go quickly, and let the saint’s blessing be brought to us, and thou shalt recover;
they also who went forth to slay him are countermanded and recalled. Accord-
ingly, two men went to the Christian, and without stating what had happened

