--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-150.png ---
124 : Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

1400. September 18th, an annual pension of thirty marcs
was granted to the Dominicans of Cork, Dublin, Waterford,
Limerick, and Drogheda."

1484. In a general chapter of this order, held at Rome

" King, p.87.

province have suffered cruel torments for the Catholic faith, has been gathered, in
these our days, into the celestial granary ; since of forty-three convents which the
Order possessed in this island, not a single one survives to-day, which the fury of
the heretical persecutor hath not either burned or levelled to the ground or di-
verted to profane uses. In these religious establishments, there were counted about
six hundred, of which but the fourth part is now in the land of the living, and even
that number is dispersed in exile ; the remainder died martyrs at home, or were
cruelly transported to the island of Barbadoes.” Among other facts connected
with this period, it is recorded that Father Thomas Fitzgerald, a Dominican, a
priest, combining great zeal and piety, with primitive simplicity of manners,
ressed himself as a peasant, and in that assumed garb. served the Catholics
of Cork during the entire period of Cromwell’s usurpation. Father Eustace
Maguire, of the convent of Cork. was no less distinguished, in the time of terror
and persecution, for his intrepid courage, than for his n.eek piety and religious zeal.
Being chosen by the Catholics as governor of the castle of Druimeagh, near Kanturk,
he so guarded and defended it during the period of Cromwell's wars, that it was
never taken or surrendered.

In 1689 King James II. landed at Kinsale, and proceeded thence to Cork. On
his arrival in this city, the king lodged in the house of the Dominican Friars, and
on Sunday heard mass in the Church of the Franciscans, called the North Abbey.

At the accession of William, Prince of Orange, the most persecuting laws were
enacted against the Catholic clergy and people. The Dominican Friars fled from
St. Mary’s Island, of which they never alter were able to resume possession. The
Convent was used for the residence of the Governor or Mayor of the City. It was
called, in after times, the Great House of St. Dominic's, aud became the town
mansion of the Earl of Inchiquin.

About the year 1698, Father John Morrogh, O.S.D., not being able to escape
from the city, on account of illness, was taken prisoner, thrown into irons in Cork
jail, where he found rest in a pious death. in the year 1702. About the same time,
Father Walter Fleming, O.S.D.. came to Cork, whence he sailed to France, in
company with Father John O'Heyn (author of the interesting Dominican history,
called Epilogus Chronologicus), and having sailed the year after for Ireland,
with Father Daniel M‘Donnel.of the same Order, both Friars were seized on board
before they came on shore, and more than a year were kept in chains and close con-
finement in Cork jail, whence they were allowed to take shipping again for France.

In the beginning of the 18th century Father Ambrose O’Connor. appointed
Provincial of Ireland while in Spain, privately returned home, and made his visi-
tation in this country, providentially escaping the spies who were in search for
him. In the Memorial or Report of his Visitation as Provincial, which he drew
up for Pope Clement IX. in 1704, he states that he found about ninety Dominican
missionaries working in the service of religion, but living in concealed places, and
that five were confessing the faith in prison.

The fury of the persecution somewhat abating about the time of the Hanoverian
succession, the scattered Dominicans of Ireland cautiously began to unite and form
themselves into communities. The friars of Cork lived together in the narrow
obscure lane in the northern district of this city, off Shandon-street, called to this
day Friary-lane. Father Peter M ‘Carthy was Prior.

1731. In the Report of the Lords’ Committee to ing ire into the state of Popery
in Ireland, one Friary only is returned as being in Cork, with the number of friars
unknown.

In 1784, the Dominicans built a more suitable convent and chapel in a more
public and convenient place, on the site of old Shandon Castle. They remained

ere till 1839, when their present beautiful church of St. Mary’s, on Pope’s Quay,
was solemnly dedicated.

