--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-106.png ---
86 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.
Kilfenora ; in the barony of Corcumroe. The annals

‘na O101E ap—‘ I bow to the grace of God, but I leave the blessed St. Lachtain
to avenge it.” When one neighbour visits another in sickness or in trouble the first
salutation is: ‘010 aca Muipe sacar Laccain Leat, aca cao ca oft 4 poop mo
épore,” &c. _‘‘ May God and the blessed Virgin and St. Lachtain assist you, my
dear friend, and what is the matter with you?” and as terms of applause and ap-
probation they have: Laécatn Leac and Laécain Leac fead, #¢., Lachtain

with you, and Lactain be your arm, meaning, success attend you, and more
strength to you, &c.

Archdall gives a list of obits from the ‘Annals of the Four Masters,” as bee
longing to this place, in his MS. additions preserved in the Library of the Royal
Irish Academy, which appears to support Dr. O’Donovan’s opinion that Archdall
confounded Kilfarboy, Ci// Feabrath, in the county of Clare, with Cill Foibrighe,
or Kilfoibric, now Kilbrew, near Ashbourne, in the county of Meath, and it may
be also confounded with Bealach Adbhra, in Muscraigh, in the county of Cork,
another of St. Lachtain’s churches. See ‘‘ Annals of the Four Masters,” A.D.
622, p. 245, A.D. 737, n. f. 768, n.’k. 836, n. g.

In the Ordnance Survey Papers of the countyZof Clare in the Royal Irish
Academy, vol. i., p. 331-4, we find the following notice of the parish and church
of Kilfarboy :—

The parish of Kilfarboy, in the barony of Ibricken and county of Clare, is bounded
on the north by the parish of Kilmannaheen, in the barony of Corcomroe, on the
east by the parish of Cloony, in Corcomroe barony, and the parish of Eidh-
neach, in the barony of Inchiquin ; on the south by the parish of Kilmurry, in the
barony of Ibricken, and on the west by the Atlantic Ocean. See Engraved Map
of Down Survey.

The name of this parish is of ecclesiastical origin, but whether the component
parts are radically correct is more than I am at present prepared to decide. The
present form of the name is that by which it is known within the memory of the
oldest inhabitant, and it is also by that name the parish is set down in the book of
Regal Visitation. The name as it is spoken would | be spelled thus, Ci// Fearbaigh,
i.e, the Church of Saint Fearbach, but of this Fearéack no historical account has
reached us.

There is a tradition in the district that this church is called A‘l-Frarabuidhe
from a number of (yellow men) Spaniards who were drowned at Spanish Point,
near it, having been buried here many yearsago, That the Spaniards were drowned
and buried here is a fact, but whether the peasantry in striving to account for the
origin of the name of the church have not pressed this circumstance into their
assistance, is a matter that may be surmised. A‘i/-Fearbuidhe would literally
mean the Church of the Yellow Men; but Ceill Feab-Rath, as it is written in
**O'Clery’s Calendar,” would mean the Church of the Healing or Sanctifying
Graces, and this was the name by which the place was known for centuries before
the advent of the Spaniards or ‘‘ Yellow Men.”

Archdall seems to think that this is the Ci// Foibrie mentioned by Colgan
{A. A. S. S. p. 360), of which Cormack was Bishop, whose death is placed by
the same authority in the year 837.

He may or may not be right in this, but he has no proof that Ci Foibric was
situated in the ancient district of Ui-Bracain. ‘‘There is no recollection of Cité
Foibric or of St. Cormac here, neither is there of any other saint, but of Saint
Lachtain, whose festival is still observed in the parish on the 19th day of March,
the same as in Achad-Uir in Ossory, and whose well is situated within the church-
yard, and still much frequented by devotees” and invalids, on Sundays and

"hursdays, nor are those visitors niggardly of their presents to the shrine of the
saint, for nothing is seen about the well but old memorials of their affection
and devoted piety.

The old Church of Kilfarboy stands in the townland of Kilfarboy, to which
it gives its name, measuring 65 feet 9 inches in length, and 17 feet in breadth ;
the walls in good preservation, excepting the west gable, which is down to the
height of the side walls. There is a pointed doorway in the south side, at


