--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-142.png ---
116 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

in this abbey 700 monks and 17 bishops, who devoted them-
selves wholly to a contemplative life.!

822. The Danes plundered and burnt this city.*

823. They renewed their depredations.!

838. The town was again spoiled.™

839. The Danes repeated the like devastation.”

874. Died Domnald the scribe.°

891. Died Soerbrethach, another scribe.?

908. Ailliol M‘Eogan, the abbot of Cork, lost his life in

' Walsh's Prospect, p 145. *Annal. Inisfal. \ Id. ™ Tr. Th. p. 632. ® Annal.
Lnisfal. ° Tr. Th. p. 632. ? M'Geogh

their spiritual courts, and commit them to prison, so dispeopling the country, &c., that
therefore, your Lordship would favorably represent the same to the Government, or
otherwise make such order that may hinder these inconveniences ; and the rather,
because the like duties are not demanded in any other Christian country by the
clergy, nor from any other but the Roman Catholics.” In 1694, they present—
‘*An address to the Judge, complaining of the Popish clergy that come from
beyond the sea, and praying for the suppression of Popish schools.” In 1696,
they state—‘‘ That John Mulconry, a Popish priest, and others, are out on their
keeping, and cannot be taken by warrant; we, therefore, pray they may be
ordered to surrender themselves by a certain day, or that they may be proclaimed
rebels and traitors to the Government.” In the following year they complain—
“*That Cornelius Crowley, a/ias Maddery, of Skibbereen, and Owen MacOwen
Sullivan, of Kilcaskin parish, and others, all Irish Papists, have taught school,
and continue to do so, contrary to the Act.” In April, 1698, they present—‘‘ That
P. Morrough, Titular Vicar-General, and Dr. John Slyne, Titular Bishop (of
Cork), remain in this kingdom contrary to the late Act.” On 13th of August,
1701, they also complain that—‘‘ John Connelly, formerly Vicar of Rossecarbery,
still remains in this kingdom contrary to the Act.” And on 27th July, 1702, they
again present—‘‘ That John Slyne, Titular Bishop of Cork. remains still in this
kingdom, exercising ecclesiastical jurisdiction contrary to the late Act.”

We have said that St. Finbarr first erected his cell on the banks of Lake Allua.
In after times that spot became a favorite resort of Pilgrims. Seven churches
were erected there, and it bloomed as a garden of Paradise :—

‘There is a green island in lone Gougane Barra,
Where Allua of songs rushes forth as an arrow ;
In deep-vallied Desmond, a thousand wild fountains
Come down to that lake from their home in the mountains.
There grows the wild ash, anda time-stricken willow
Looks chidingly down on the mirth of the billow,
As like some gay child, that sad monitor scorning,
It lightly laughs back to the laugh of the morning ;
And its zone of dark hills—oh ! to see them all bright’ning
When the tempest flings out its red banner of lightning ;
And the waters rush down, ’mid the thunder’s deep rattle,
Like clans from their hills at the voice of the battle ;
And brightly the fire-crested billows are gleaming,
And wildly, from Mullagh, the eagles are screaming.
Oh! where is the dwelling in valley or highland
So meet for a bard as this lone little island.”

At the close of the 17th century, a priest named Denis O’Mahony chose
this spot as a penitential retreat, and restored its seven chapels. Opposite the
island he placed a small tomb with the inscription—'‘ Hoc sibi ef successoribus in
cadem vocatione monumentum imposuit Dominus Doctor Dionysius O Mahony,
Presbyter licet indignus, an. dom., 1700.”

