--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-175.png ---
County of Cork. 149

Tuaim Musgraighe; The bishop St. Domangan, a disciple
of St. Carthag mochuda, was venerated here, and his festival
observed on the 29th of April.4 It is supposed to be in Mus-
kerry, but is now unknown.

Tulach Mhin ;* In Feara muighe feine, now called the barony
of Fermoy. St. Molagga, who was living A.D. 664, founded
an abbey here, where his festival is held on the 20th of
January.’ This place is also unknown.

Tullelash; in the diocess of Cloyne and barony of Duhallow.

Matthew M‘Griffin founded a priory here for canons regular
following the rule of St. Augustin ; it was afterwards united
to that of Kells, in the county of Kilkenny.

Weeme ;*" near Cork. Here was another abbey of the same
canons, which was dedicated to St. John the Evangelist.¢

Thomas was abbot in 1311.4

Thomas, the abbot, being deposed, a licence was granted,
dated the 22nd April, 1350, to the convent to proceed to
elect an abbot ; Michael, the prior, made a return, that they
had elected Altan O’Nullanagaly.!

Gilbert was abbot; he was immediately succeeded by
David,* who, according to King, was abbot in 1339

Thomas succeeded him.™

Richard O’Tenewir was abbot, but the time is uncertain.”

Youghail;* a seaport and a borough town sending burgesses
to parliament.

4 Act. SS. p. 631. * Td. p. 148, 149. * Harris Tabl. © Id. © King, p.148.
‘Id. * fd. p.141. 'fd, ™Id, *Id.

% Tulach Mhin.—St, Molaga of Tulack Mhin is thus commemorated in the
Festology of Aengus Céle De, in the Leabhar Breac, at 20th January: “ Molaga,
ie., at Land Bechuire in Bregia he is ; or that he was Lachine, son of Dubhdlige,
i.¢., from Tealach-min Molaga, in Fermoy, in Munster.” The ancient lives of St.
Molaga contain some interesting accounts of his relations with this place and the
surrounding country.

37 Allan, on account of his infirmities, resigning, Brother Gilbert O’Brogyd
was elected Abbot in 1334 (1354).

38 Youghal Inquisition, 1oth September, 44 Q. Elizabeth, finds that a close called
John Mahony’s ‘Park, near Youghall, was parcel of the possession of this friary.
Rot. Chancery.

Inquisition taken 31st March, 1604, finds that Sir Walter Raleigh, Knt., was
seized in fee of this friary and of all its possessions spiritual and temporal.

This friary had ten acres of land Ai the small measure, with the chapel of St.
Anne, near Youghall, with an acre of land. The townlands of Rathmolane,
Knocknagippaghe and Carraghmoneoore, in said county, containing one carucate
and a-half ; townland of Balling, in said county ; half a carucate in county Limerick,
townland of Englandstown, one carucate; Liscarrell, three-quarters of a small
carucate ; in county Mayo, Knockfarrin, near Ballinrobe, half a quarter. In county
Waterford, the great burgage of Lismore, half a carucate; in Fereguilie a carucate;
townlands of Bally-McPatrick and Curraghbal-livorough, two carucates. In county
Cork, townland of Garran-James, one carucate; Kilbrie, near Kilbolane, one
carucate ;—All granted to George Isham and his heirs, at the annual rent of
£8 17s. 10d.—(Chief Remem.)

