--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-133.png ---
County of Cork. 107

1159. O’Dubery, abbot of Cluanavama, died this year ; in
the annals of Inisfall, he is called bishop Dubrein.*

= Annal. Inisfal.

to damnation.” To corroborate this statement, we may mention that St, Cormac

mac Cullenan, king and bishop of Cashel, directed in his will, as Keating informs

us, that his body should be interred at Cluain-Uamha, because it was the burial-

place of Colman mac Lenan ; if that could not be accomplished, he was to be
uried at Disert Diarmada.

Nearly opposite the west end of the Cathedral, at a distance of thirty yards,
stands the beautiful round tower of Cloyne. Its present height is a little more than
a hundred feet ; its diameter at the doorway is nine feet two inches, with a thick-
ness of wall of three feet eight inches. At the upper floor the diameter of the
tower is seven feet two inches, with a thickness of wall of two feet nine inches,
The tower is divided internally into storeys by seven offsets taken from the thick-
ness of the wall; so that, drawn in section, the internal line of wall would
show a zig-rag outline. The tower was originally crowned by the usual conical
stone roof, which is stated to have been destroyed by lightning on the night of
the roth of January, 1749. Bennet gives the following description of this storm :—
*« A storm of lightning, with thunder, on the night of Janu: roth, 1749, passed
through the country ina line from west to east, and, after killing some cows in
a field south of Cork, struck the round tower of Cloyne. It first rent the vaulted
arch at the top, threw down the great bell, together with three galleries, and de-
scending perpendicularly to the lowest floor, forced its way, with a violent explosion,
through one side of the tower, and drove some of the storeys, which were adnfir-
ably well jointed, through the roof of a neighbouring stable. The door, though
secured by a strong iron lock, was thrown to the distance of sixty yards, and quite
shattered to pieces. A few pigeons that used to roost on the top of the steeple
were scorched to death, not a feather of them being left unsinged. With the
same bad taste which distinguishes all the works of our modem architecture, the
vaulted stone roof of the tower was never repaired, but the height was lowered
more than six feet, and a vi/e battlement, in imitation of the worst English churches,
substituted in its stead.” Wilkinson, treating of the ‘Ancient Architecture of
Treland,” p. 71, states that ‘‘the material of this tower is reddish-coloured sand-
stone of the country, in good preservation ; much of it is very carefully worked to
the curvature of the tower with a chisel-pointed hammer ; the masonry of the
doorway is put together in a laboured manner, and finely chiselled, each stone
being apparently worked as it was required ; the stones are flat-bedded and of
considerable size;” and, subsequently, he adds, “ that the masonry of the doorway is
so carefully put together, that a file alone would produce such careful work in the
present day.” :

In a paper read twelve years ago before the Kilkenny Archzological Society
(New Series, ii., 265), we find it stated that ‘the round tower at Cloyne is locally
known by the Irish-speaking people as Giol-cach ; and the same term is locally
applied at Ardmore, at Kineth, and at Ratto, in Kerry,” Within the past few
days this statement has been confirmed and further illustrated by the Rev. Richard
Smiddy, in his interesting work on the ‘*‘ Druids, &c., of Ireland.” At page 199
he writes: ‘‘The universal popular name of the round tower in Munster, Con-
naught, and the other Irish-speaking parts of Ireland, is cuslceach or culctheach :
this name is formed from cuilc, ‘a reed,’ and theach, ‘a house,’ that is the reed-
house, or reed-shaped structure. Thus, the people have always said, with constant,
unerring accuracy, when speaking of these structures, cui/ceach Cluina, ‘the round
tower of Cloyne ;’ cui/ceach Colmain, ‘the round tower of St. Colman ;' cuilceach
Deagiain, ‘the round tower of St. Declan,’ at Ardmore, and so on.” To explain
the origin of the name, he further adds: ‘‘ There is growing in the bogs and
rivers of Ireland a large kind of cué/c, or reed, with a conical head, which, in form
and shape, resembles the lines of the round tower, and which, I am sure, was
originally taken as the model for it.” The writer in the transactions of the Kil-
kenny Archseological Society, already referred to, also states: “I was never
more struck with the poetic applicability of this term to our round towers than at

