--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-227.png ---
County of Donegall. 195

A small monastery was founded here, in the 15th century,
for friars of the third order of St. Francis,*.and probably on
the very site of the ancient abbey of St. Natalis. It was
granted, by King James I., to James Viscount Clandeboys,
who assigned it to Arthur Lord Chichester.

Inis Keel ;* an island lying off the coast of the barony of
Boylagh and Bannagh. St. Conald Coel was abbot of Inis-
coel, and is honoured here on the 12th of May; St. Dallan

* War. Mon.

13 /niskeel.—An island in the mouth of the Gweebarra bay, in the barony of Boy-
lagh, on which stands to this day the venerable ruin of a monastery and church.
St. Connell, to whom the foundation belongs, is mentioned in the Martyrology
of Donegal under the 22nd May as follows :—‘‘Connall, abbot of Inis-Caoil, in
Cinel Connaill, and he is himself of Cinell Connaill.” His name also occurs in
the Festology of Aengus Céle Dé in the ‘‘ Leabhar Breac,” fol. 34 a., at 11th
May, and, indeed, there is hardly another name more celebrated in Irish eccle-
siastical history, because of the Saint's connection with the celebrated Cain Dom-
naig—a rule for the observance of Sunday as a day free from all servile work.
This rule enjoins, under severe penalties, that every class shall abstain from all
kinds of work on Sunday, and that none shall travel on that day; but wherever
one happens to be on Saturday evening, there he shall remain till Monday
morning. To this there were some exceptions, such as bringing a physician to
a sick person, relieving a woman in labour, saving a house from fire, &c.... A
priest was forbidden to travel on Sunday or Sunday night, or from vesper time on

jaturday night till Monday morning, unless to attend a sick person supposed to
be likely to die before the following morning, in which case the rule pre-
scribes :~-

‘* A priest may journey on a Sunday
. To attend a person about to die,
To give him the body of Christ, the chaste,
If he be expected to expire before morning.”

To see a priest travelling on Sunday was considered an omen of disaster, or of
immediate death to some member of the Ferie or tribe unto whose house or terri-
tory he came; and hence King Diarmit’s astonishment at perceiving the young

riests approaching him on Sunday morning. This curious document is given in
the ‘ Yellow Book of Lecan,” T.C.D., class H. 2, 16, col. 217, and begins with
an account of its being brought from Rome by St. Connall, which runs thus in
translation :—‘‘ This is the knowledge of the Cain Domnaig, which was brought
by Conall, son of Ceolnian, who went on his pilgrimage to Rome, and was written
by the hand of God in heaven, in the presence of the men of heaven, and which
he placed upon the altar of Peter the Apostle in Rome.” There is also a
metrical version of this rule given in a manuscript copy of the ancient laws
preserved in Cod. Clarend., Brit. Mus., vol. 15, fol. 7, p. 1.4, 6; the two following
stanzas are taken from it:—

** A book placed by the hand of the great God
Upon the altar of Peter and Paul ;
It has been found in the appropriate book
That the Sunday should not be transgressed.

“It was the comarb of Peter and Paul
Who found the book first,
And he promulgated the book
As he had it well in memory.”

It gives me peculiar pleasure to state here that I have taken this interesting
notice of the Cain Domnaig, and its relation to St. Connell, from a paper by the

