--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-300.png ---
264 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

said, by other writers, to owe its foundation to Africa, daughter
of Godred, King of Man, and wife to Sir John de Courcey ;

his works we learn that St. Patrick and St. Francis were his patron saints, a choice
most natural for a Franciscan born in Lecale. An Inquisition, held in Downpatrick
on the 9th of April, 1662, found that the Cromwell family were possessed of the
site of the Franciscan friary, with its cemetery, gardens, and orchards, together
with the townland of Magheralagan, and ‘‘ Connegar his acre,” which ha

portions of the endowments of that friary. It was also possessed of the lands of
“ Ballylarge ” and ‘‘Ballentlewe.” The friary of Down eventually adhered to the
branch of the Franciscans called Observantines, St. Francis of Assisi conceived
the design of founding an order of men whose duty it would be to preach the doc-
trine of Christ by word and example, and exhibit in their own persons the poverty
and humility of the Gospel. His rule was confirmed by Pope Honorius III. in
1223. Like all human institutions, however, the order lost its first splendour, and
a spirit of secular aggrandisement obscured the humility of the poor Friars Minors.
The most zealous and numerous portion of the order selected convents which had
renounced their property, and where the strictness of their founder's rule was ad-
hered to. Such convents were called “ Strictioris Observantia,” and were said to
be reformed. The Irish Franciscans finally adopted this reformation. They were
commonly called in Ireland Grey Friars, from the colours of their habits. It would
be now impossible to find out the place where father Henry Melan re-established
his order in the vicinity of their ruined friary, but there were, in the middle of the
last century, traditions among the people of Downpatrick that a numerous order of
friars were re-established in that town about the year 1644. The Franciscans
eventually established their /ocus refugii in the townland of Drumnaquoile,*
and the order, though exiled from its ancient monastery, and stripped of its rich
possessions, still continued to appoint in its chapters titular guardians fur the

* In the townland of Drumnaquoil, in a field belonging to James Laverty, which
adjoins the road that there forms the boundary between the townlands of Drumna-
quoil and Dunturk, is the site of the friary of Drumnaquoil which was the ‘locus
refugii” of the Franciscans of Down. A legend told by the people accounts
for the selection of that secluded spot. They say that when the friars were
at prayer in Rome, a vision of a lady in white warned them to build a friary
where they would hear the sound of three bells ringing. The friars, wearied and
foot-sore, sat down one day before the gate of Savage's Castle, in Drumaroad, to
rest themselves, for they had searched all Ireland through for the promised sign,
when at last their hearts were gladdened by the long expected chimes surging
across the valley from the lonely hill-side of Drumnaquoil.

Some would say, perhaps, that it was less owing to the influence of the vision
than to probability of escaping the priest-hunters that the friars came to that
mountain solitude, but the eyes of the Government were upon them even there, as
the following document, preserved in the Birmingham Tower, shows :—

“*To the Right Honourable the Lords’ Committee appointed to inquire into the
present state of Popery in the Kingdom of Ireland.

‘* In obedience to your Lordships’ order, bearing date the 6th day of the instant
November, to me directed, as sheriff of the County of Down, requiring me to
return unto your lordships an account of what reputed nunneries or fryaries, and
what number of fryaries, are within the said county of Down, and what number of
fryars or nuns are reputed to be in the same respectively.

“T do therefore humbly certify unto your lordships that, after the strictest in-
quiries, I can find there is but one reputed fryary in the said county of Down, kept
at a place called Drumnacoyle, in the said county, within eight miles of Rathfri-
land, in which there is commonly reputed to be nine fryars. And that there is not
in the said county of Down any reputed nunnery, nor any nuns.

“ Dated at Kirkistowne, the nineteenth day of November, one thousand seven
hundred and thirty-one. “OW. SAVAGE.”

It is probably to the Friary of Drumnaquoile that Primate Oliver Plunket refers
in his report to the Propaganda, in 1670, on the state of the diocese of Down and

