--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-210.png ---
182 Ancient Monasteries of freland.

Cluainenach ; an abbey was founded here by St. Columb,
who made St. Columb Crag, his disciple, abbot of it. This
is now a chapel in Inisoen, situate three miles north of Derry,
near the ruins of O’Cahane’s castle.4

Clonmany; situate near the sea, in the barony of that
name. St. Columb built the abbey of Cluainmaine, which
was formerly a very rich monastery’, but is now a parish
church in the diocess of Derry.‘

Conwall ;® has its situation on or near the river Swilly, in
the barony of Kilmacrenan.

Fiachry was abbot of Congbail, in the territory of Gleann-
suilige, in Tyrconnel, and of Clonard, in the county of Meath;

4 Liber Visit. * Tr. Th. p. 373, 489, and 494. * Liber Visit.

his journey through that great gap which is called Barmesmore Tire Aodha (the
great gap of Tyrhugh), and through the territory called Afagh /the, and came to
the place in that country where he built the church commonly called Donaghmore,
over which he appointed one of his disciples, Dubdubaun, the son of Corcan.”

In the manuscript of Duald Mac Firbis, which has been noticed already, Clon-
leigh is called Tech-na-Comairce, and the fact is recorded therein that seven
bishops came from it. The following is the entry :—‘‘ The seven bishops from
Tech-na Comairce, May 28.”

5 Comwall ; O’Clery says this is Con-baile, that is, Compagns in the original.
Like other famous monasteries in ancient Ireland, this of Conwall created the

‘owth of a considerable town around it, but unlike Glendalough or Clonmacnoise,
it has left hardly any remains of its former greatness. Of the monastery nothing
now remains but a few old walls in the centre of the graveyard, which occupies
the space on which Conwall stood. These walls have crumbled under the wasting
action of time, and are at present almost level with the ground. Close to one of
them, on the south side, is a very curious tombstone shaped like the lid of a coffin,
with a cross and other sacred emblems—evidently the result of a very old style of
art—engraved upon it. Some illustrious men are mentioned by the Four Masters
as having died in this monastery. Under A.D. 913. ‘‘ Scannlan Airchinneach, of
Congbhail-glinne-Suilighe, died ;” and under A.D. 1204, ‘‘Sitric O’Struthen,
Erenagh of Conwal, that is, head of the Hy-Murtele, and chief man of all the
Clann-Snedhgbile for his worth, died, after exemplary penance, and was interred
in the church which he had himself founded.” As I said, a considerable town
grew up around the monastery ; this town demands a special notice, for it was the
theatre of one of the most remarkable events recorded in the history of Tirconnell.
This extraordinary incident is related by the Four Masters under A.D. 1258, with
all its details ; I shall give the substance of this narrative :—The famous battle of
Creadran-Cillé, in northern Sligo, was fought between Geoffrey, or Godfrey,
O’Donnell, Lord of Tirconnell, and the renowned Maurice Fitzgerald, the then
Lord Deputy of Ireland. Both leaders met in a personal encounter. O’Donnell
gained the advantage, but he carned his death wound from the combat. About a

ear after, while he was still lying ill of his wounds on an island in the secluded

ugh Beathath, or Lough Veagh, messengers came from O'Neil, demanding
hostages and other tokens of submission. O'Donnell’s answer was to summon the
men of Tirconnell from all quarters to wait on him. Having assembled at his
call, he ordered them, as he was not able to lead them, to prepare for him the
coffin in which his remains should be buried, to place them therein, and to carry
him into the very midst of his people. He told them to fight bravely, as he was
amongst them, and not to fear the power of their enemies. They then proceeded
in battle array at the command of their lord, to meet O’Neil’s force, till both armies
confronted each other on the banks of the Swilly. After a hard-fought battle the
Tyronians were routed, and the men of Tyrconnell, returning from the field, laid

