--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-247.png ---
County of Donegall. ary 5

hall, three chambers, an orchard, and a quarter of unprofit-
able land, called Killenecrosse, and another quarter of the
same kind called Romullen, a/ias Farenebraer, were in
M‘Swinefannet’s country, and of the annual value of 6s. 8d.
Irish money.—Chief Rememb.

Seinglean ;» was a celebrated abbey found by the great St.
Columb ; in process of time it became a parish church, and
is in the diocess of Raphoe?P

» Tr. They p- 494-
Iv.
“ Then, daughter of O’Donnell ! dry
Thine overflowing eyes. and turn
Thy heart aside ;
For Adam's race is born to die,
And sternly the sepulchral urn
Mocks human pride !
Vv.
“ Look not, nor sigh, for earthly throne,
Nor place thy trust in arm of clay—
But on thy knees
Uplift thy soul to God alone,
For all things go their destined way
» As he decrees.

vi.

“«Embrace the faithful crucifix,
And seek the path of pain and prayer
Thy Saviour trod ;
Nor let thy spirit intermix
With earthly hope and worldly care,
Its groans to God. td

vit.
“ And thou, O mighty Lord ! whose ways
Are far above our feeble minds
To understand,
Sustain us in these doleful days,
And render light the chain that binds
Our fallen land !

VL
“‘ Look down upon our dreary state,
And through the ages that may still
Roll sadly on,
Watch Thou o'er hapless Erin’s fate,
And shield, at least, from darker ill
The blood of Conn !”

2 Seangleann, or Glencolumbkille, as it is now commonly called, is a peaceful
valley, enclosed by two walls of bare mountain, and terminating in a strand on
which the waves of the Atlantic break for ever. The mountain that encloses it on
the northern side presents a fine escarpment breaking into precipices, where it
runs out and forms the noble ocean cliff called Glen Head. It is in very truth a
retreat to the mind of the pious contemplative, who in this remote vale, shut in be-
tween Slieve League and Slievatooey, may have his meditations on the Divine
attributes quickened and elevated into higher contemplations by the presence of

