--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-272.png ---
240 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

Castle Buy ;* or Johnstown, in the Ardes, three miles north
of Portaferry, near the Lough of Strangford. Hugh de Lacie,
in the 12th century, founded here the commandery of St. John
the Baptist.*

A.D. 1327. The prior of Kilmainham, granted to friar
Thomas de Vallet, during life, his diet at the brethren’s table
in his house, with clothes of the value of twenty shillings

* War, Mon.

in 1496, to inquire what lands Sir Janico had died seized of. It would seem that
these lands passed into the possession of the Kildare family through Allison
Eustace, the grand-daughter of Sir ‘Janico, who married Gerald, the 8th Earl of
Kildare. In 1622 the Protestant bishop reports among the possessions of the
see :—‘‘In Roseglass the temporalities of a town and a-half. In Bright three
plowlands, and the Earl of Kildare oweth for rent out of the said three towns
4§ 10s. 8d. per annum.” In the margin he places the name of John Russell, of
Killough, as tenant in occupation of Rossglass, and that of Christopher Russell
as tenant in occupation of Bright. In 1639 a lawsuit was instituted by
the Protestant bishop for the recovery of these lands, but the civil wars
interrupted it, and the Fitzgerald family held these lands until 1808, when the
Right Hon. Charles James Fitzgerald, Baron Lecale, sold them to his step-
father, William Ogilvie, Esq., whose great grandson now possesses them. About
the year 1178, John De Courcey granted the church of Bright to Malachy,
Bishop of Down. This was, however, a mere confirmation on the part of the
conqueror of what had from the earliest times belonged to the See. Shortly after-
wards Malachy annexed it, under the name of “ Brichten,” to the Abbey of St.
Patrick, of which the bishop was ex-officio abbot. In the account rendered on
the 4th of March, 1305, into the Irish Exchequer, by Walter de la Hay, Escheator of
Ulster, in which he accounts for the rents received by him during the vacancy of
the See, he returns £3 16s. 6d. out of Rossglasse, but he received nothing out of the
lands of Bright, or of “ Bycospille,” which may be supposed to be Tullinespick—
the bishop’s hill—a small townland, still held under the Protestant bishop, in
which the remains of a cemetery, cogtaining graves lined with stones, Nav
been discovered in what seemed to have been arath. In the taxation of Pope
Nicholas the church of “Brich” is valued at eight marks ; but in 1316 it was des-
troyed by the Scots, under Edward Bruce. Grace, in his “ Annals,” under that
year, records :—“ The church of Bright, in Ulster, full of persons of both sexes, is
burned.” At the dissolution, the church of “Britt,” at the annual value of £6 13s.
4d. was appropriate to the Abbey of St. Patrick. The Protestant bishop returns
it in 1622 as being in ruins. These ruins were removed when the Protestant church
was erected in 1745.

© Castlebuy.— The lands of Castleboy, otherwise Johnstown, which formerly
belonged to the Hospitallers, consist of nine townlands, containing 1,335 acres.
In the townland of Castleboy there remains a small portion of the castle standing ;
and, a few perches to the N.W., the ruins of the chapel, measuring sixty-three by
twenty-one feet. The last window was a triplet of lancet compartments. On the
north and south sides were lancet windows, about six feet removed from the west
angles. There were entrances to the north and south sides, about twenty-six feet
from the west end. A small lancet window was in the west wall, about six feet
from the floor. A cemetery surrounded the building; but the ground is now culti-
vated up to the very walls.”—(Reeves’ “ Eccl. Antiq..” pi 164.)

The prior of St. John of Jerusalem was possessed of the following appropriations
in the Diocese of Down ;—The chapel of St. John’s Point, Rectory of Rathmullan,
Ballyhay, ‘‘ Ballyhayes lyeing in the parish of Donaghdee, in spiritualities and
temporalities parcel of the late dissolved priorye of St. John’s of Jerusalem.” Inquis.
13 October, 1623. “ Ecclesia Sti. Johanis de Moyvelusk,” now the Grange of Mo-
lusk, Ballytrustan. A.D. 1320, two carucates of land in “ Ardmacaisse” which had
been forfeited by John FitzNicholas, of Slane, on account of his having joined
Edward Bruce, were granted by the King to the prior of St. John’s, of Jerusalem.

