--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-295.png ---
County of Down. 259

heads of the pillars and arches, the tops of the windows, and
many niches in the walls, were adorned with variety of sculp-
tures, some parts of which yet remain. At the east end is a
very lofty and magnificent window, and over it are three
handsome niches, in which niches the pedestals whereon stood
the Saints Patrick, Columb, and Brigid still remain. Adjoin-
ing the east end of the church are two square columns, in one
of which was a winding staircase leading to the roof. At the
west end is a very high pillar; several cells have beendiscovered
behind the abbey, one of which was floored with a mosaic
work, but in a coarse and inelegant manner.*

Priory of Regular Canons," This was called the priory of
the Irish, and was founded in honour of St. Thomas, in the
year 1138, by Malachy O’Morgair, bishop of Down,’ who died
A.D. 1148."

° Hist. County of Down, pp. 27,29. % War. Mon. * War. Bps., p. 55-

does not seem to be the grave in which St. Patrick was first interred, for there is
no record of a church ever having stood at that part of the cemetery ; and we
know, from the passage already given from the Book of Armagh, that a church
was afterwards erected over the grave of St. Patrick. The place in which the
relics of St. Patrick, St. Brigid, and St. Columba were concealed, until discovered
in the year 11&, seems, from the account already given, to have been inside the
Cathedral. A correspondent of the Udster Examiner, in a letter dated Down-
patrick, February 9, 1870, says :—‘‘ About thirty years ago I had a conversation
on the subject of St. Patrick’s grave with a very old man named John Millar,
then over ninety years of age, who well remembered the making of this grave.
It was on the occasion of the renovation of the Cathedral, then many years in ruins,
that, on excavating under the high altar, or communion table, as Mr. Millar
termed it, three stone coffins were discovered, which were firmly believed to
contain the sacred remains of our three patron saints. The matter created a sen-
sation in the town and the surrounding country. Mr. Millar remembered the
grave being made, and the three coffins, with their contents, reverently removed
and covered up there, and the ancient market cross brought to the place, and
placed at the head of the grave, to mark the spot where rested the sacred re-
mains.” In all the drawings, however, of the abbey, when in ruins, a cross is
represented as standing at that portion of the cemetery, which seems to contradict
John Millar's account in a very vital point.

A portion of another ancient cross is in the grounds of the new Catholic Church,
and the remainder of it is in the possession of James Cleland, Esq. That is the
cross which Harris described— Near the Court House in the street lie several
portions of an old stone cross, on the shaft of which is carved a crucifix, or the
image of Jesus. It is generally called the Market Cross. yet probably it stood in
one of the churchyards, and was erected for superstitious purposes. The pedestal
is one solid stone, in form of a tube, about three feet high, all of a stone called
Lapis Molaris, or grit.” Ina grant of certain lands in Downpatrick to the abbey,
made by John de Courcy, one of the boundaries mentioned is ‘‘the cross of St.
Moninna,”’ which may probably be the cross in question.

| Priory of Regular Canons.— Archdall has confounded two priories situated at
different portions of the town, the Priory of the Irish—AMonasterium Hibernorum
—and the Priory of St. Thomas the Martyr, of Regular Canons.

Priory of the Irish.— St. Malachy founded, in the year 1158, a Priory of Regular
Canons, which, in after times, was called the Monastery of the Irish, or Afonaster
Gallagh. The ‘‘ Terrier” says of it :—‘‘ Monasterium Hibernorum, hard by the
cathedral, is the church of the channons;” and then informs us that it paid to the
bishop—‘‘in proxies, two marks; in refections, two marks ; in synodal, 2s.—four


