--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-164.png ---
138 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

arcade continues to form one side of a chapel, being a cross
aisle. In the choir are some old tombs of the family of Clan-
carty, &c. The steeple, a light building about eighty feet
high, and placed between the nave and choir, is still entire,
and supported by Gothic arches. From the gateway, on
either side, to the high road, are high banks entirely formed
of human bones and skulls, which are cemented together with
moss : besides these, and great numbers strown about, there
are several thousands piled up in the arches, windows, &c.
The river Bride runs neat this ruin. The lands were granted
to Lord Muskerry, but after the wars of 1641, Oliver Crom-
well gave them to Lord Broghill.8

Kulcruimthir ;® near the city of Cluainchollaing, or Kilchuile,
in Hy Liathain, the modern barony of Barrymore. St. Abban
built a church here and died in a respectable old age A.D. 650.
St. Cruimtherfraech gave his name to this church and is
honoured there.* This place is now unknown.

Kilfeacle ; or the church of the Tooth, so called froma
tooth of St. Patrick that was preserved there. We cannot
find any circumstance on record respecting this abbey, but
that St. Beoan of Cluainfiachul, in Muscragia, was a disciple
of St. Patrick’s.! This place is also now unknown.

Killabraher ; or the Church of the Brotherhood ;-a ruined
monastery between Churchtown and Liscarol, in the barony
of Kilmore ; it is uncertain to what order it did belong.*

Killeigh ; a small village four miles from Youghal, in the
barony of Imokilly.

St. Abban, who died A.D. 650, built an abbey at Killachadh
conchean, and made the holy Virgin, St. Conchenna, abbess
of it.

© Smith, vol. 1, p. 210, 211.” Act. SS., p. 615, 623. | Zr. Th. p. 181. * Smith,
vol. 1, p. 326. | Act. SS., p. 632.

% Kilcruimthir was situated about a mile and a-half north of Fermoy, on the old
road to Ballyhindon Castle ; it is now an old ruin and burial ground. It was the
parish church of H? Maoile Machaire, in the ancient territory of Fermoy. See note
under Fermoy.

The genealogy of St. Cruimthir Fraech, from whom this place has its name, is
thus preserved in Leabhar Breac in the Royal Irish Academy, p. 16, col. 4 :—
Cruimthir Fraech, son of Carthach, son of Nedi, son of Onchon, son of Findloga,
son of Find Fir, son of Causcrach. &c.

The following passage from an ancient Irish life of St. Aban, mentions this and
other churches in the same country :

“‘ And Aban then returned into the territory of Corca-Duibhne, and he blessed
Bourneach and he gave it to Gobnait ; and he blessed Cill-Aithfe, on Magh Con-
chon, and he gave it to Fionnan, and Fionnan foretold the coming of Aban many
years before he was born. He blessed Cu/ [Cill] Cud/ainge and Brigobann, and Cill
Cruimthir and Cill na Marbh, and he blessed Cluain Aird Mo Beococ, and Cluain-
Fionnglaise, and he left Beccan in it; and he left the office of the Holy Church in
every church of them.” —Life of St. Aban. O'C., MS., C.U.L, p. 54

