--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-220.png ---
192 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

few reliques that were preserved was the book of the acts of
St. Columb, written by St. Muran in Irish verse, some frag-
ments of which yet remain; also a very large and ancient
chronicle, held in great repute, &c., &c.: and the pastoral staff
of St. Muran, richly ornamented with jewels and gilding, is
still preserved by the O’Neils ; many miracles, it is said, have
been wrought by it, and the people of that country,
especially the family of the O’Neils, take their oaths upon it in
the decision of controversies.® _

Fahan is now a parish church in the diocess of Derry.'

Fanegaragh ; a small house for friars of the third order
of St. Francis™ was built here by M‘Ruinifaig."

Garton ; lies two miles West of Kilmacrenan, where St.
Columb founded a monastery,? which is now a parish church
in the diocess of Raphoe.P

® Act, SS., p. 587. ' Liber Visit. ™ War. Mon. "Allemande. ° Tr. Th.
BP. 494. P Liber Visit.

10 Garton—This is now the name of a parish about ten miles from Letterkenny,
and the centre of the most enchanting scenery. It has two charming lakes of the
same name, and known as the Upper and Lower Lakes. In nature, I venture
to say, there is hardly anything to excel them for beauty. They are broad,
sparkling sheets of water, enclosed by green and well-wooded banks, looking like
a monster diamond set in a circle of emeralds. On the western side of the Upper
Lake, there is a broad slope, and upon it are to be seen the remains of a chapel
and abbey, covering the spot where St. Colum-Cille or Columkille was born, in

21. ‘* The father of the Culdees,” says the Rev. Cesar Otway, in his Sketches
in Donegal, “could not come to birth in a more appropriate place. The lake is
one of the finest of those numerous sheets of water which are interspersed through
the valleys and mountains of this highland district; either in the midst of the
mountains, forming the sources of rivers, or in the lowland valleys expanding as
their receptacles or reservoirs. High or low, small or large, they form interesting
objects for the tourist; and I am not sure whether, in this way, our Irish lake
may not be found as worthy of a visit, as one in Cumberland or Scotland, or even
Switzerland.” From this we can easily understand the cause of that unbounded
affection which, we are assured, Saint Columkille always entertained for his
native place, Adamnan, his biographer, tells us that this affection was intense,
and he goes on to relate a very touching incident illustrative of it:—‘‘On a
certain occasion, while Columba was in Iona, he told one of the brothers that a
crane, driven about by various winds, should come, weary and fatigued, and lie
down on the beach of the island quite exhausted. ‘Treat that bird tenderly,’
said the Saint; ‘bring it to some neighbouring house, where it may be kindly
received and well nursed for three days and three nights. When the crane is
refreshed after that time, unwilling to sojourn any longer in this strange land, it
shall fly back directly to its /ovely home in Ireland. I am very anxious about
this bird. because it comes from my native place.’ The good brother obeyed,
for the bird came, and after three days of gentle nursing, rose on its wings to
a great height, and marking its path through the air homewards, it directed
its course across the sea to Ireland, straight as it could fly ona calm day.” To
this day St. Columkille is the pride of Tirconnell. He has given his name to
one of its most important parishes, and all over the country are scattered relics
and traditions of him in rich profusion. These traditions, together with a life of

+ him, written by St. Adamnan, and another by Manus O’Donnell, who belonged
to the saint's family, enable us to give the following notice of St. Columba,
which has already appeared in an interesting little work on Donegal :—‘“ St.

Patrick’s visit to Ireland, and the ready acceptance of the gospel by the inhabit-

