--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-160.png ---
134 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

seven in breadth, and contains the village of Cove, opposite
to which his Majesty’s largest ships may ride, and the vessels
trading to Cork generally anchor there.8@ The festival of St.
Saran, the son of Archuir, is observed here on the 15th of May.»

Inchrie ; there was a Cistertian abbey here, dedicated to the
Virgin Mary ; it was a cell of the abbey of Maure in this
county,! and is now unknown.

Iniscarva ;*™ five miles from Cork, on the river Lee, in the
barony of Barrets. St. Senan of Iniscathay, built an abbey
here, and placed eight of his disciples therein.! This is now
a parish church in the diocese of Cloyne™

Inishircan > An island between Cape Clear and the main-
land. Inthe year 1460, Florence O'’Driscol, the Great, founded
a small monastery here for Franciscan friars of the strict
observance ;° other writers say, that Dermot O’Driscol was the
founder in 1470? In 1537 the citizens of Waterford destroyed
all the villages on this island, with the mill, castle, and friary.4

This monastery was built near the castle, on the plan of
that at Kilcrea, but much smaller ; the steeple is a low square
tower, from whence runs the nave, with an arcaded wing, to
the south.

Inquisition 2nd March, 5th James, finds that, 3rd March,
33rd Elizabeth, a grant for a term of years was made of this
priory to John Bealinge, at the annual rent of 26s. 8d, Irish
money.— Chief Rem.

LInispict, or Inispuinc,;® near Inishircan, in the barony of

weSmith, vol. 1. p. 169. “Vard. vit. Rumoldi. ‘War. Mon. Harris's tab. *Was
called anciently Tuaimnava, Act. SS. p.140. \War. Mon. Harris's tab. ™Visitation
Book. *Was called anciently Iniskicran. °War. MSS. vol. 34, p. 162. War. Mon.
PWar. Mon. Smith, vol. 1, p. 141. "ld. p. 290.

*“Jniscarra; The Irish lives of St. Senan of Jnis Cathaigh, relate that on his
return home from his great preceptor, St. David of Kilmony, in Alba, he came into
ae sy of Munster; and having settled down in the place then called Ozlean arda

Liathain, now Barrymore Island, he remained there forty days, till admon-
wa by an angel to go forth, and to found a church for himself, wherein to serve
God, with his followers. St. Senan went forward, we are told, directed by the
angel, till he came to a place then called 7saim-na-mba, on the side of the river
Linne (now the Lee), where he founded his church, and fixed his ecclesiastical resi-
dence. When the petty prince of this place came to hear that St. Senan had occu-
pied bis land without permission, he sent messengers to warn him off, and to de-
mand rent and restitution. Subsequently he sent his own favorite steed to be
maintained at the expense of the monastery, but the steed fell into the stream at
the church, where she was drowned, so that no part of her remained to be seen
but her carra, i.¢., her quarters, and hence the place was called /ms Carra.
Tuaim na-mba was its name till then. St. Senan thus maintained his position
here, and left eight of his disciples in the Church of /nés Carra, with St. Cillian,
under the protection of Fechen, son of Faighe, king of Muscraighe, who was also a
disciple of St. Senan.—Life of St. Senan, chap. 3, pp. 15-16.

38 Inispict. The Irish ‘Life of Saint Carthach, or Mochuada, Bishop of Rahen
and Lismore,” contains the following account of this place :—

“* A certain time the King of Munster, namely Cathal, son of Aodh, was in the

