--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-069.png ---
The County Armagh. 49

Temple Brigid® is said to have been founded in this town by
St. Patrick.

Temple Fartagh, or the church of the Miracles, was founded
without the town by the same saint, for St. Lupita, his eldest
sister, who was buried here;!' and in the beginning of the last
century, her body was found buried deeply under the rubbish
of her ancient nunnery, in a standing posture; two crosses
were also discovered closely guarding the body before and be-

ind.™

January 9, 1618, King James granted the monasteries of
pemple Fartagh, and Temple Breed, to Francis Annesley,

sq.”

Dominican Friary. Porter, in his annals tells us, that
there was one at Armagh; which is more than probable, other-
wise the primate Scanlain, who was of that order, would not
have made his foundation for the friars minor.°

“War. Mon, ‘Usher. Tr. Th. p. 19. War. Mon. ™Vard. p. 184. "Lodge,
vol. si. p. 274. Burke, p. 339.

®® This little abbey church of St. Brigid is a very ancient foundation. It stood
outside the rath, and quite close to the site of the present Catholic church. The
“* Annals of Ulster” and the ‘‘ Four Masters,” at 1085, record the death of Gormgael
Loighseagh, coarb of the Regles Brighde at Armagh. In 1179 the “Annals”
record a wide-spread conflagration which spared the church of St. Brigid, though
it consumed the greater part of the city. In 1189, Armagh was bumed from St.
Brigid’s cross to the Regles Brighde. At the time of the dissolution of religious
houses St. Brigid’s was a nunnery, and in inquisitions and patents it is always
coupled with Temple-Fertagh. An inquisition of 1612 finds that it was a nunnery,
and that after the dissolution it was occupied by a certain singer who resided in
said monastery, place, or house called Zemplebreed. (UI. Inq. Armagh, No.3, Jac. 1.)
In 1616, it was granted to Francis Edgeworth, assignee of John Eyres. In 1619,
it was passed by patent to Sir Francis Annesley, in whose family, as Earls of
Anglesey, it was transmitted, till in 1799 the assignment of a lease was converted
into a fee by Leonard Dobbin.
°° Na Ferta, or the graves, was the first spot granted by Daire to St. Patrick on
his arrival in Armagh, and was the site of the first church there erected by the
saint. The word Feria of itself signifies sepudchres or miracles; but that it has
the former meaning here is plain from a passage in the ‘‘ Book of Armagh.”
focelin renders this name Festum Miraculorum, which interpretation, adopted
yy Ussher and Colgan, has passed into our author’s text. The designation
Ferta Martyrum is derived from the relics of the holy martyrs placed there by
St. Patrick. At 1078 the ‘* Annals of Innisfallen ” record the death of “ Dubtach
Na Sochaind, sage priest of Na Ferta, at Armagh.” On September 25, 1430,
Primate Swayne wrote from Termonfechin to David M‘Gillade, Prior of the
Culdees of Armagh, directing him to procure redress for the Abbess of Na Ferta,
whose rights had been invaded by certain persons, At the dissolution of religious
houses the possessions of this convent passed, with so much other ecclesiastical
roperty, to the Annesley family, and in the last century, by purchase, into other
Pans The place where this nunnery stood is now traversed by Dobbin-street.
“In Dr. Reeves’ opinion there is not a shadow of authority for the existence of
a Dominican friary at A: h. ‘* The Four Masters,” he observes (Op. Cit. p. 32.)
“* At the year 1264, relate that the archbishop of Armagh, Maelpatrick O’Scannail,
brought the friars minors to Armagh; and, according to tradition, it was
MacDonnell Galloglegh that commenced the erection of the monastery. Here pro-
z

