--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-151.png ---
County of Cork. 125

the roth of November, a licence was granted to Maurice
Moral, prior provincial, to reform this convent.”

20th December, 35th King Henry VIII. a grant was
made to William Boureman of this monastery and its ap-
purtenances, with three small gardens, containing two acres,
a water-mill, two stangs of land, a fishing pool, half a sal-
mon-weir, three acres of arable land called the Half Skeagh-
begge, ten other acres of arable, and twenty acres of arable
and twenty of pasture in Galverston ; to hold the same in
capite for ever, at the annual rent of 6s. od. sterling.*”

1578. This year, in the month of October, to the great
grief of the Irish inhabitants, the bishops did publicly burn,
at the high cross in this town, the image of St. Dominick,
which had belonged to this monastery.*

This house, which stood in an island called Cross-green,
on the south side of the town, is now entirely demolished

Augustinian Friary ; A monastery was founded, on the
south side of the city, in the reign of King Edward I, for
friars following the rule of St. Augustin ;2 some writers give
this foundaticn to Patrick Lord Kingsale, who lived in the
reigns of King Henry V. and VI.;* and another writer brings
the foundation so low as 1472, or 1475.°

6th October, 19th of Queen Elizabeth, a grant was made
to Cormac M‘Teige M‘Carthy of this friary and its appur-
tenances, containing two acres, a church, &c., at the annual
rent of £13; and for the other possessions the rent of 16s. 8d.
all Irish money.¥

Of this building, the steeple, which is 64 feet high, and the
walls of the church, still remain ; the east window, the only one
in the choir, was truly magnificent, and measured 30 feet in
height and 15 in breadth ; the whole erection was converted
into a sugar-house, and is now called the Red Abbey.°

Carmelite Friary ; Bourke is the only author who men-
tions this house for White Friars.

Nunnery of St. Fohn the Baptist; William de Barry and

“Bourke. p.87 ‘Aud. Gen. *War. Bps.p. 564. Smith, vol. 1, p. 388. *War.

mon. *. ade vol. 4, p. 35. Herera, quoted by Allemande. Aud. Gen. ° Smith,
vol. 1, p. 388.

WAugustinian Friary.—Inquisition 31st October, IV. King James, finds that the
friars were seized of the third part of a water-mill called the upper mill of Douglas,
on the lands of Buelibracky, and the tithes of the mill and the said lands, that
William White and John, his son, by writing, dated XIII. Edward IV., granted
to the friary a parcel of land in Shandon, near Cork, in breadth between the lands
of St. John the Baptist, on the north, and the lands of the said William and John
on the south, and in length from the land of the Grey Friars, on the west, to the
highway on the east :—

Inquisition 7th October, V. James, finds that the said mill was built by the
O’Dalies, and that the said lands of Buelibracky contain, by estimation, two acres,
and that the same did belong to the friary.

