--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-170.png ---
144 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

in the county of Waterford, was abbot of this monastery, and
principal of the school founded there; his festival is held on
August 14th;? a city grew up here, in which there was always

? Calend. Vet.

who was Abbot of Darinis Molana in Hy-Kinnselagh. but St. Mac-in-tsaer ; what,
possibly, gave occasion to this confusion of names, was the tradition mentioned by

ynch, that St. Fachtna, before proceeding to Ross, was abbot of another monas-
tery called also Molana, situated on the islet of Dair-inis, at the mouth of the
Blackwater. See further mention of this monastery in Archdall, at the County
Waterford.

In the Felire of St. AEngus, the name of St. Fachtna occurs in the strophe for
the 14th of August :—

“With the calling of Fortunatus,
Over the expansive sea of ships,
Mac-an-tsaer, the noble chief,
The festival of Fachtna mac Mongach.”

So also he is commemorated on the same day in the metrical calendar of Mari-
anus O’Gorman :—

“*Great vigil of Mary:
Gregory, and the bright hero Felix,
The just Eusebius in their company :
The sons of Daigre, with Dinil ;
Let Brocad be in their presence :
Fachtna the smooth, fair, hairy son,
Eiclec, Cummen, Coeman,
Not narrow fences this structure.”

St. Cuimin of Connor, in his beautiful poem on the characteristic virtues of the
saints of Ireland, thus celebrates the zeal and devotedness of St. Fachtna :—

‘*Fachtna, the generous and steadfast, loved
‘To instruct the crowds in concert,
He never spoke that which was mean,
Nor aught but what was pleasing to his Lord.”

It is generally supposed that the St. Fachnan, patron of Ross, is the same
with St. Fachnan, patron of Kilfenora, Two circumstances strongly confirm this
identity, viz.:—that their festivals are now kept on the same day, the 14th of
August, and that the same tribe was dominant in both territories. However,

ch informs us that in his time (1660) the feast of St. Fachtna, the holy founder
of Kilfenora, was kept on the 20th of December.

As regards the old Cathedral of Ross which, thanks to the munificence of the
O'Driscoll family, was one of the most remarkable structures of the kingdom, the
following interesting details are given in the Consistorial Acts of the year 1517 :—

‘‘ The city of Ross was situated in the province of Cashel, in the middle of a
fertile plain, rich in corn-fields. and stretching along the sea-shore. It was
encompassed with a wall, had two gates, and contained about two hundred
houses. In the centre of the town was the cathedral church, dedicated under the
invocation of St. Fachnan, an Irish saint, confessor, whose feast is celebrated on
the vigil of the Assumption of the Blessed Virgin Mary. The walls of the church
were of cut stone ; there were two entrances—one lateral the other in the front,
and in both you descended by three steps to the level of the church. Its floor was
unpaved, and its roof was of wood. covered with slates. The interior of the
church presented the form of a Latin cross, and in size corresponded with the
church of St. Maria del Popolo in Rome. It was divided into central nave and
aisles, and the nave was separated by stone pillars from the aisles. Its roof was
of wood, covered with slates ; in the centre was the choir with wooden benches,

