--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-177.png ---
County of Cork. 151

1665.—21 July. This Friary was leased by Richard, second Earl of Cork, to
Samuel Hayman, Esq., a Somersetshire gentleman. The demise conveyed ‘all
that messuage or tenemt lately erected and built by the said Samuell Hayman,
w't the yard, orchard, and garden thereunto belonging, and also the severall houses,
&c., and one plett of enclosed ground conteyning by estimation six acres.
Together with the dissolved Nunnery or Chappell called St. Anne's Chapell, w't
the applotements, as the same are all now in the tenure of the said Samuell Hay-
man, situate, lying and being in and neere the scite, circuit, ambite and precincts
of the dissolved Monastery of St. Francis: All the South Abbey of Youghall.”
Among the covenants is the following, which declares too plainly the unsettled
state of public affairs—‘‘ And keeping always resident on the premisses, for every
tenemt, one able English footeman wth a pyke or muskett well and compleately
armed and furnished ; and therew all shall and will answere and attend the
said Earle, his heires or assignes, in all musters and in the service of the Crown
and defence of the country, being thereunto reasonably warned and summoned
during this lease.”

I 81.—1 Jan. ‘Elinor, y® daughter of Mr. Thomas Vniacke Esquir® in y*
South Abby, Buryed.”—[Church Register]. From this entry, and from similar
ones of the same date, we learn that the graveyard of this Friary was used for
burials so late as this period ; but it appears to have fallen into disuse about the
close of this century.

The Dominican Friary, commonly called the North Abbey.—1268. Thomas
FitzMaurice FitzGerald, surnamed »Afpagh, founded a Friary for Dominicans, or
Friars Preachers, at Youghal. This House was first placed under the Invocation
of the Holy Cross, but it was subsequently dedicated to St. Mary of Thanks (S.
Maria Gratiarum), on account of a miraculous image of the B. Virgin preserved
here.—( Hib. Dom., p. 272).

1281.—A General Chapter of the Dominicans was held here.

1296.—Thomas Afpagh FitzGerald, the Founder of this Friary, was here
interred, in the middle of the Choir.—(Grace’s Annals). Marleborough’s Chronicle
makes his decease two years later.

1303.—22 Oct. Robert de Percival, an eminent benefactor to this House,
having been slain, along with William de Wellesley, in a battle with the Irish,
was interred in this Friary.

1304.—A General Chapter of the Dominicans was held here.

1450.—The Image of the Madonna and Child, for which this Friary was
famous, is of Italian workmanship of this period. It is of carved ivory, about
three inches high. The circumstances of its discovery, as detailed in 1644, by the
French traveller, M. de la Boullaye le Gouz, are sufficiently curious :—‘‘ In the
Dominican Convent (at Youghal) there was an Image of the Virgin, formerly
held in the greatest reverence in Ireland, which arrived there in a miraculous
manner. The tide brought a piece of wood on to the sands opposite the town,
which several fishermen tried to carry off, the wood being rare in this country, but
they could not move it; they harnessed ten horses to it without effect, and the
reflux of the tide brought it near the Dominican convent. Two monks raised it
on their shoulders and put it in the court-yard of the convent ; and the prior had
in the night a vision that the image of our Lady was in this piece of wood ; which
was found there. So say the citizens, who have still a great devotion towards it;
but the Dominicans, having been persecuted by the English settlers, carried it
elsewhere.”

1493.—This Friary was reformed by Bartholomew Comatius (Bononiensis J,
23rd Master of the Order, as appears from the register of Joachim Turrianus, 35th
Grand Master, where are contained these words: ‘‘ Approved : The Reformation of
the Monastery of Joachia (é.¢., Jocalia or Youghall,) made by Master Bartholomew.”

1501.—Vincentio de Bandello was ‘appointed to reform the houses of the Domi-
nicans, and for this purpose was armed with Apostolical authority. He addressed
himself to the work with zeal; but, being unable to visit Ireland in person, he
deputed John de Baufremez, of Holland, to represent him. The Friaries of Cork,
Limerick, and Youghal were pre-eminent in desiring to subject themselves to
regular observance ; and are specially mentioned and lauded in the Bull issued to
Baufremez, in 1504, by Pope Julius I1.--(Archiv. Apost. Lib, L. fol. 201.)

