--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-230.png ---
198 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

Kilchartaich ;“ St. Carthach was bishop of Killen, now
called Kilchartaich, about the year 540; his festival is observed
on the 5th of March. This church was situated in Tirboguine,
a territory in Tyrconnell, and is supposed to be Kilcarr, which
is now a parish church in the diocess of Raphoe.®

> Act. SS., p. 474. Vard. vita Rumol. Lib. Visit.

14 Kilchartaich.—This has been toned down into the more euphonious name Kilcar,
a romantic village about eight miles from Killybegs. At the end of the town there
is a mountain torrent brawling over its rocky bed; beyond it, a pleasant little valley,
with a neat church in the centre, and then a hill dotted with numerous cottages.
On one of the slopes of this hill are the remains of the old abbey. Its foundation
and its name are derived from St. Carthac, as we are informed by Colgan in his
Acta Sanctorum, p. 475, c. 8. The life of the saint is given very completely by
him. It appears he was the clder Carthach, Bishop of Lismore, and brother
or nephew of St. Natalis, whom we have mentioned in our notice of Inver. After
having studied under St. Kieran, he established and governed many religious
houses throughout the provinces. Not far from the ruined walls of the Abbey
are three holy wells, two of which are attributed to St Carthach and the third,
strangely enough, to St. Patrick! Pilgrims don’t flock here now as of old ; these
wells are abandoned ; they are in no esteem among the people, who seem to reserve
all their fervour in this respect for their annual visit to the not far-distant Sean-
Glean, or Glen of St. Colum-Cille. This may also account for the absence of those
crowds who, if tradition is to be relied on, toiled up the rugged sides of the giant
Slieve Leagne, year after year, to the hermitage of the holy recluse Hugh MacBracken,
and St. Asicus, the saintly Bishop of Elphin. to beg their intercession. Of these holy
men, whoretired from the world into this lofty mountain solitude, beneath which the
waves rage and roar for ever, Colgan and the Martyrology of Donegal give us a
most interesting account. St. Aodh MacBriec, or Hugh Breaky, or MacBracken,
is thus set down in the Calendar of Cashel under the roth November :—‘‘ Hugh,
the son of Brecii, of the race of Fiachii, son of Neill, bishop of Kildare, in Meath,
and of Slieve Liag in Tir-bochaine (Tyrconnell). The age of Christ when his
spirit went to heaven, 588.” Colgan adds that he is venerated in different churches
as patron, for instance in “‘ Znach Crinnin, in the country of Muscry (Muskerry), in
Munster, and in S/iabh Liag, in Tirconnell, where a chapel is consecrated to him,
and a solemn pilgrimage performed in his honour. He died in the year 588, ac-
cording to the Chronicon Cluanense and other Annals.” Of St. Asicus, who also
had a hermitage on Slieve Leagne, we have ample information. The Rev.
Mathew Kelly, in his notices of the ‘‘ Patron Saints of Ireland,” writes of him :
“*St. Asicus (Asaach), bishop, patron of Elphin. A disciple of St. Patrick,
who obtained from a Druid the land on which the church of Elphin was founded.
Asicus was its first bishop. Among the different members of St. Patrick's
household, to whom provision for all the ecclesiastical wants of the infant church
was committed, St. Asicus is described as an artificer in brass—‘ faber acris
Patricii.'. In a penitential spirit St. Asicus renounced the government of his
diocess, and retired to the mountains of Sliebh Liag, in the present county of
Donegal, from which he could not be. persuaded toreturn. He died in his retreat,
and was buried in the church of Rathcunga, in Tirhugh, Donegal. His name is
in the Martyrology of Tallaght on the 26th of April. His festival is observed
on the following day in the diocess of Elphin.” This notice is not so full as the
one given by Colgan, who writes :—‘‘The most holy and chaste bishop, Asicus,
when on a certain occasion it was necessary to state a certain fact, uttered a
falsehood, having spoken without sufficient reflection. In consequence of this
fault he became so great a penitent that he determined never to be seen in the
place where he had given so great a scandal. Wherefore, having resigned his
see, and the government of the monastery in which he lived, he retired to the
northern parts of Ireland, and on a certain moyntain, in the country of 7ir
Boghaine, called Stiabh Liag, he led a solitary life for seven long years. Mean-
while his monks, by their untiring exertions, discovered him in that desert, and


