--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-244.png ---
212 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

Ratheanich ; in Inisoen. St. Brugach, the son of Degad,
was bishop of Ratheanich about the beginning of the sixth
century ;! from which period we can learn nothing of it.

1 Act. SS., pp. §01 and 597.

Cillé and Adamnan, died. A.D. 1173. Murray O’Coffey, Bishop of Derry and
Raphoe, a son of chastity, a precious stone, a transparent gem, a brilliant star, a
treasury of wisdom, and a fruitful branch of the canon; after having bestowed
food and raiment upon the poor and the destitute, after having ordained priests
and deacons, and men of every rank, rebuilt many churches, consecrated many
churches and burial-places, founded many monasteries and regleses, and fulfilled
every ecclesiastical duty ; and after having gained the palm for piety, pilgrimage,
and repentance, resigned his spirit to heaven in the Drubhregles of Colum-Cillé
in Derry, on the roth day of February. A great miracle was performed on the
night of his death, namely, the dark night was illumined from midnight to day-
break ; and the people thought that the neighbouring parts of the world, which
were visible, were in one blaze of light ; and the likeness of a large globe of fire
arose over the town and moved in a south-easterly direction, and all persons arose
from their beds, imagining that it was daylight, and it was also thus on the east
side of the sea. A.D. 1198. Gillamacliag O’Branan resigned his abbacy ; and
Gillachriest O’Kearney was elected coarb of St. Columbkille by the universal
suffrages of the clergy and laity of the north of Ireland. The church of Raphoe
was plundered and destroyed by John De Courcy this year. A.D. 1261. Mael-
patrick O’Scannal, bishop of Raphoe, was elected to the archbishopric of
Armagh. A.D. 1266, The dignity of bishop was conferred at Armagh on a friar
of the order of St. Dominic (z.¢, O’Scoba), and he was appointed to Raphoe.
A.D. 1299. Farrell O’Freel, bishop of Raphoe, died. He was the most celebrated
man of his time for charity, humanity, piety, and benevolent actions. A.D. 1306.
Professor Thomas O’Naan, archdeacon of Raphoe, and bishop-elect of the same
church, died. A.D. 1319. Henry Mac-an-Chrosain, bishop of Raphoe, died ; and
Thomas, son of Cormac O’Donnell, abbot of Ashroe, was then elected to the
bishopric of Raphoe. A.D. 1366. The bishop of Raphoe, s.¢., Mac Mongail, died.
A.D. 1397. Hugh MacMahon recovered his sight by fasting in honour of the
holy cross of Raphoe, and of the image of the B. Virgin Mary at Athtruim.
A.D. 1411. The holy crucifix of Raphoe poured out blood from its wounds. Many
distempers and diseases were healed by that blood. A.D. 1420. The bishopric of
Raphoe was procured for O’Gallagher (Laurence). A.D. 1438. O’Gallagher, i-c.,
Loughlin, bishop of Raphoe, died. A.D. 1543. Edmond, the son of Brian
O’Gallagher, bishop of Raphoe, died on the 26th of February, after having received
opposition respecting the bishopric. A.D. 1561. Art, the son of Felim Fin
O’Gallagher, bishop of Raphoe, died at Ceann Maghair on the 13th of August.
He was much lamented in Tirconnell. A.D. 1597. A dispute having arisen this
year between the monks of Assaroe and the friars of Donegal, respecting the body
of Baron Inchiquin, who had been drowned in the river Erne, it was decided by
Redmond O’Gallagher, bishop of Derry, and Niall O’Boyle, bishop of Raphoe,
in favour of the friars.” The jurisdiction of the bishop of Raphoe originally in-
cluded more territory than it now controls, It was measured by Tirconnell’s
boundaries, which embrace the large and important district of Inishowen. Its
limits have been contracted; Inishowen has been taken from it, and why or
wherefore, does not appear. Reasons are assigned off-hand by some who pretend
to a knowledge of the matter, but what amount of historical foundation they have
is hard to know. What we do know is, that in 1266, ‘‘German O’Cherballen,
bishop of Derry, seized by violence, and appropriated a part of the diocese of
Raphoe.” Ware, in his antiquities, states this fact, and for his authority refers us
to the Registry of Clogher, which the writer of this has never been able to see.
The part thus violently appropriated is Inishowen. or the peninsula of Eoghan,
one of the sons of the famous Niall of the Nine Hostages, and founder of Kinel
Owen, or the O'Neill family, who possessed it down to the fifteenth century, from
which time the O’Doherty’s, descendants of Conail Gubban, were lords of the
district, till the death of Sir Cahir O’Doherty in 1610. «

