--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-156.png ---
130 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

1248. The abbot was fined in the sum of 410 for divers
offences.4

1290. Maurice le Fleming made a considerable grant to
this abbey.”

1301. The abbot Maurice Garton fell from his horse into
the river Funcheon, in the neighbourhood of this abbey, and
lost his life ;* he was succeeded by Henry.

1303. Maurice, Lord Kerry, died in this year; at which
time Thomas, his fifth son, governed the abbeys of Fermoy
and Odorney."

1311. Dionysius was abbot.”

1355. David Rawyr O’Kyff was abbot.*

1367. Henry was abbot, and in same year William

aKing, p. 359. "dd. p. 282. ‘Jd. p. 358. ‘ld. p. 283. “Lodge, vol. 2, p. 103.
“King, p. 359. "dd. p. 282.

which are Hi Britain, Garran O'Ceamaighe, out of which are Hi Ciannaighe.
Cill Cruimtir, is the Church of this Tuath.

“And one third of Termun Brigh Gobun, belongs to Hi Cain, i¢., the two
Ceannacans and Cul Lugdach, Moin Mucrinde, Ceall Droma, the Marbhthir, the
Lianans, Cnocan Hi Chroinghilla and Beallach na Ros.

“ Tuath O’Cuscraidhe, é.e, Liathmuine and Cul na n-Aracul, out of which are
Hi Lighda Cluain Meic Carthaind. out of which are Hi Artuir, Lis an Cnuic,
out of which are Hi Donnchada, Cill Mochuille, out of which are Hi Beachagain,
Hi Dunadhaighe, Hi Riagain, Daire Faible, out of which are Hi Adnachain,
Loch Arda O’Cullin, out of which are Hi Cuinn Leath, Baille, Hi Finn, out of
which are Hi Finn, and its other half Bally, the Arda in Terman, Brigh
Ghobunn, Liagan I.ig Uanach, out of which are Hi Ithfearnan, Durmach, out of
which are Hi Dunadaighe, and the church of this Tuath is Ath Cros Molaga, out
of which are Hi Corrcrain, Hi Ceamsain, Hi Aengnsa, Hi Muircheartaigh, and
Hi Duibheidigh, and a third of Termann Brugh Ghobunn belongs to this Tuath,
i.e, the Baile of Brigh Ghobunn itself, Cluain Aei, Carratc on Furnaidhe Garran
Hi Adhnachain, Baile Hi Mhasilmordha, Baile Hi Chuind, Cnocan Muighe
Ginne, Cluain Garbhain, Cul Aithlis Cindfhaclaidh Gort na Fuinnsion, Cill
Seanaidhe and they are the family names which belong to this church, i.e,
O’Maclmorda are its Comarbs, and O’Finghin, its Aisdre O’Brian, O’Deargain
O’Mulalaidh, O’Flannagain and Meic Breathnuighe and .Hi Artuir, are the
chieftains of this Tuath.

“Tuath O’Conail, from Gleann Cubhra to Lebglaise and Hi Dubhlaidh are the
chieftains of that Tuath, and Liattruim, from Airgeadlomn. eastward to Lebglaise,
is the patrimony of O'’Dubhlaidhe, and that is O’Naibelain, Baile Idir da
Abhainn, #.e. Ard Meic Cuillair, and Uamh Croine, and from that eastward to
Dun O n-Gennti these are one Baile, and out of it are Hi Aengusa Magh Drisen,
on the south side of the river and on the north, these are one Baile, and out of it
are Hi Manog, Feic-Beg is a half Baile, out of it are Hi Riain and Hi Feargusa,
Rath Siadhail and the Corran are its other half Baile, and out of it are Hi Cuain,
Cil Uird is the church of this Tuath, and out of it are Hi Mongain and Hi
Cuillinnain and Hi Brocain.

“ Hi Cuscraidh Sleibhte is the border land of this Tuath we have mentioned, #.e.
Cill Mithne Gort Aicde, Maelrach, Lurga, Daire Leith Re Meic Meada, Gleann
Domhainn, Ceapachna Fian, Gort Ruadh, Ceapach Hi Meadhra, Daire Leathan ;
Eidhnen Molaga, with its Terman, is the church of this Tuath; the Comarb of
that church is Mag Floinn, and the clerk of its crozier is O’Coscrain.

‘The most noble ofthe Tuaths of the other half of that country is Tuath Muighe
Finne in which Cathair Duthaghain is. out of which are Hi Dubhaghain, and the
breadth of this Tuath is from the middle of Relig na m-hanleagh eastward to Ab-

