--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-113.png ---
County of Clare. 93

Six-Mile-Bridge,™ called in Irish Abhuinn O’Gearna, from
the river Gearna, which runs from. thence to the Shannon.
There was a chapel, or vicarial house, near to this town,
which did belong to the Dominicans of Limerick, but of this
there are now no remains.”

Tomgrany,*™ Three or four miles east of Lough Derg. An
abbey was founded here early.

A.D. 735. Died the abbot St. Manchin

747. Died the abbot Conell.?

791. Died the abbot Cathnia O’Guary.*

886. The abbey was plundered.»

949. It received the same treatment.°

964. Cormac O’Killeen, a man famous for his learning and
good works, died this year; he was abbot of Tuaimgrene

~ Burke, p. 213. * Was called anciently Tuaimgraine. % Act. SS. 0. 332.
*"M-Geogh. *Id. » Tr. Th. p. 634. °id. A

“This important battle,” says O'Donoghue in his Memoir of the O’Briens, ‘‘was
fought on the roth May, 1318, besides establishing on a secure basis thenceforward
the power of the O’Briens as sovereigns of Thomond, and expelling from its bor-
ders the issue of Thomas De Clare, who, to the weakness of a title depending merely
on the sword, had added the crime of murder, conceived in perfidy, if not sacrilege.”
We are informed that, ‘previous to the banquet from which Brian Roe was hastily
dragged to be torn between horses, by Thomas De Clare, he and Brien had, in
token of greater confidence, partaken of the same holy sacrament, the consecrated
host being divided in two parts for the purpose.” —See the celebrated Remonstrance
on Pope John XXII, from O'Neil, in ‘‘Fordun’s Scottish Chron.,” Lib. 12,
p. 26.
So great was the resentment of the Dal g-Cais against the De Clares, that the
body of Richard, the father, was cut into minute pieces. Pembridge confirms
this statement, but adds that the remains were interred in the church of the Friars
Minors in Limerick. See ‘‘O’Donoghoe’s Memoir of the O’Briens,” Chap. ix.,
pp. 127-128, n.22.—See Cathreim Toirdhealbhaig (Wars of Thomond) A.D. 1318.
36 This abbey was situated on the river O’Gamey in the present town of Six-Mile-
Bridge, situated partly in the parish of Kilfentenan, barony of Bunratty, but chiefly
in the parish of Kilfinaghty, barony of Tulla, six Irish miles N. W. by West from
Limerick on the old road to Ennis.
Abhan O’g-Cearnaigh, now the river O’Garney, which gives name to this village
(called in Insh ‘‘Droicheat Abhain O'g-Cearnaigh,” or the bridge of the O'Gammey
river), rises near Broadford in Glenomra, flows through the village of Six-Mile-Bridge,
and discharges itself into the Shannon at Bunratty. This river was originally called
the Rait, gen. Raite, hence Bunraitte or Bunratty, and derived its present name of
O'Garney from the territory of Ui-g-Cearnaigh through which it flows.
See “Annals of the Four Masters,” A.D. 1564, p. 1600. n. 0. and Ordnance Map
of Clare, sheet 52.
37 A.D, 1026. Conall Ua Cillene, successor of Cronan of Tuaim Greine, was abbot.
A.D, 1031. Mac Dealbhaeth, successor of Cronan of Tuaim Greine, died.
A.D. 1093. Ailill Ua Niallain, Tanist, abbot of Cluain Mic Nois,died. The
successor of Cronan of Tuaim Greine, and the successor of Colman of Cill Mic Duach.

A.D. 1098. Macraith Ua Flathen, successor of Ciaran, and Cronan of Tuaim
Greine, died on his pilgrimage at Acha-bo ; he was of the tribe of Ui Fiachrach-
Fella.

The following unpublished notice of the history of the parish and church of
Tomgrany is found in the Ordnance Survey of Clare, in the Library of the Royal
Trish Academy :—

“‘This parish is situated near the N. E, extremity of the county of Clare, and

