--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-277.png ---
County of Down. 245

A.D. 583. Died the bishop St. Fergus; his feast is ob-
served on the 30th of March.*

785. Died the abbot Dungal, the son of Laogar.'

940. The Danes plundered and burnt this town," as they
likewise did in 942” and 988.*

"Calendar. + Act. SS., p. 257. % Tr. Th., p. 633. “Hist. County of Down,
p. 29. * Tr. Th., p. 633.

was several times plundered by them. The exposed position of Downpatrick, built
on a branch of Lough Strangford, rendered it at any time an easy prey to those
pirates. It was thenalone the possession of the relics of St. Patrick which ob-
tained for Down the honour of being the depository of the remains of St. Brigid
and St. Columba, which had been for several centuries deposited in the respective
churches where they died. The Life of St. Brigid, by Cogitosus, describes the
church of Kildare as containing the relics of St. Brigid, and of St. Conlaeth, first
Bishop of Kildare, who died in 519, four years before the decease of St. Brigid.
‘*In it the glorious bodies of both Bishop Conleath and of this holy virgin,
Brigid, repose on the right and left of the high (ornati) altar, placed in monu-
ments ornamented with interlaced work (vario cultu) in gold and silver, and
gems and precious stones, over which are suspended crowns of gold and silver.”
Adamnan, in his Life of St. Columba, describes the interment of that saint in
Jona, which occurred in the year §94. In 825, the Abbot of Iuna, “ Blathmac,
son of Flann, received the crown of martyrdom, for he was killed by the foreigners
(the Danes), at I-Colum-Cille,” because he would not inform them where he had
concealed the costly shrine which contained the relics of St. Columba. In the
year 830 the relics of St. Columba were brought to Ireland, but they seem to
have been carried back to Iona, for in the year 848 the Abbot of Iona brought
them to Ireland. Again they were returned to Iona, for in 878 they were
transferred to Ireland to save them from the Danes. It is probable that the relics
of St. Brigid and St. Colamba became finally located in Down about that period,
and that for greater security against the hostile incursions of the Pagan Northmen,
the relics of the three patrons were committed to the earth in one common tomb,
as expressed in the ancient verse, cited by Keating as the prophecy of St. Columba:

“ My prosperity in guiltless Hy
And my soul in Derry
And my body under the flag
Beneath which are Patrick and Brigid.”

From time to time various churches became possessed of portions of the relics
of these saints ; hence arose the seeming contradiction which we so frequently meet
in our ancient records, when we find it stated that these relics were in Saul, in
Down, in Armagh, in Kildare, in Iona, or in Dunkeld.

O'Donnell’s, ‘* Life of St. Columba” has preserved the following curious
legendary story of the removal of St. Columba’s remains to Downpatrick :—
“It is sufficient to relate the manner and the circumstances of the translation, which
the holy Berchan states to have occurred in this manner. Mander, a son of the
King of Denmark, and a commander of a piratical fleet of Northmen, devastating
with fire and sword the northern parts of Brittain, came of Iona. . . search-
ing for treasure. They dig up the sarcophagus, or chest, in which was the body
of the holy Columba, a true treasure, but not such as they coveted. They carry
to their ship the chest, which they afterwards opened as they were on their course
to Ireland, and finding nothing within it but human bones and dust, they shut
it up and cast it into the sea. After having been tossed on the billows of
the ocean, and driven through the waves, it is found floating on the waters in a
bay of the sea near to the city of Down. Being thus found and recognised by a
Divine revelation, the Abbot of the Monastery of Down, having opened it, placed
the holy treasure, which he took out of the chest, in the same shrine with the
sacred relics of the holy Patrick and Brigid.” This story is surpassed by a

