--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-128.png ---
104 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

Lyffevarrey, Cregan, Aneghepheyne, Lahernemannagh, Man-
ister, Nestrohuirie, and the rectories of Maure and Lyslie, or
elsewhere, in this county and belonging to the monastery of
Carigiliky, was granted for ever to Nicholas Walshe, at the
annual rent of £28 6s. 6d.

Castle Cor; In the barony of Duhallow and two miles north
of Loghort. It appears from a plea roll, 30th King Edward I,
that there was an abbey at Castle Corith;* but we have no
other account of it.

Castle Lyons )" A well-built market town, twelve miles from
Cork, in the barony of Barrymore :—

Gray Friars ; John de Barry founded this monastery in the
year 1307,™ but good authority has given this house to the Black
Dominican Friars, and says that it was dedicated to the
Virgin Mary." A considerable part of this building still re-
mains, particularly the choir, nave, and steeple of the church.
The possessions belonging to this monastery came into the
hands of the first Earl of Cork, who bequeathed the rents
and profits arising therefrom to his daughter, the Countess
of Barrymore, to buy her gloves and pins.°

White Friars ; ——— de Barry founded a monastery here
for Carmelites or Whitefriars.?

Cloggagh ;* An inquisition of the 17th of King James I.
finds the possessions of the little abbey of Cloggagh in this
county.1 We have no other knowledge of this abbey.

Inquisition 12th January, XX XIII. Elizabeth, finds that this
religious house, situated near Timoleague on the east, was
possessed of half a carucate of land, annual value, 6s. 8, Irish
money.

Clonmene; Lies on the south side of the Blackwater, in
the barony of Duhallow.

"Aud. Gen. * King, p. 133. ' Called anciently Castle Lehan. ™ War. mon.
™ Burke, pp. 291, 292. ° Smith, vol.t, p. 164. ? Burke ut supr. 4 King, p. 137.

1 Castle Lyons, or Castle Lehan, is beautifully situated in a rich fruitful soil, a
short way from the river Bride. In this place John De Barry founded a monastery
of Conventual Franciscans, anno 1307. Upon the dissolution, it was granted to
the Earl of Cork, who assigned it to his son-in-law David, the first Earl of Barry-
more, or rather, to his daughter ; for, in his will, he says :—‘‘ he bequeathes the
rents and profits of his house to his daughter Barrymore to buy her gloves and
pins.” A considerable part of this abbey still remains, particularly the choir, nave,
and steeple of the church, which are still standing connected with the parish church.

13 Cloggagh.— Inquisition 5th January, X VII. James, finds that all the titles of the
said half carucate of land did belong to the abbey ; that the fishery of the pool of
Cloggach, lying between Cloggach and Kilmoaloada, and adjoining the said lands,
did belong to the abbey ; that the said abbey, tithes, &c., were concealed by
Dermot MacCarthy, formerly Vicar of Kilmoaloada, and that on his death, John,
his son, claimed the same as his Jawful inheritance, and sold the same to
Dermot O’ Drea, parson of Kilmoaloada.”—‘' Ordnance Survey Papers,” R.I.A.,
vol. iv., p. 31. .

