--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-285.png ---
County of Down. 253

A.D. 1185. The bodies of the Saints Patrick, Columb, and
Brigid, were discovered in this abbey, with the following
epitaph written over them :—

Hi tres in Duno tumulo tumulantur in uno,
Brigida, Patricius, atque Columba pius.®

1186. Bishop Malachy and Sir John de Courcey sent an
embassy to Pope Urban III. to obtain a bull for the translation
of those sacred reliques ; and on the 5th of June in same year,
a solemn translation was accordingly made by the Pope's
nuncio.

1201. Bishop Malachy, the great benefactor of this abbey,
died about this year.!

1210. Sir John de Courcey, the conqueror of Ulster and
founder of this abbey, yielded to fate.*

® War. Bps., p. 24. » War. Annal., Hist. County of Down, p. 27. | War.
Bps., p. 196. * Monast. Angl., vol, 2, p. 1019.

Downpatrick was visited by King John in the year 1210, who, on his way to
Carrickfergus, encam: on the 16th of July ‘‘at the meadows of Down,” at a
place ales Kingsfield, and again, on his return, he spent the 2nd and 3rd of August
at ‘* Dun.”

The English suffered repeated disasters in skirmishes with the Irish, and the
Bencdictine Abbey of Down shared in their fortunes, as the following letter, written
to Henry III., in the year 1220, sufficiently testifies :—

‘To their Venerable Lord, Henry, by the Grace of God King of England, Lord
of Ireland, Duke of Normandy, Count of Anjou and Aquitane.

“The Prior and Convent of the Church of St. Patrick of Down, health and
prayers in Christ.—We transmit to your Excellency our monk with the shrine of
the patrons of Ireland, Patrick, Columba, and Brigid, and their relics. Inasmuch
as for the reverence to them, and for the promise that our lord, your father, pro-
mised forsooth that he would be a benefactor of our church, and for yourself, who
are the lord of all the land, and the patron of the patrons of Ireland, that you would
give to us and to charity some small dwelling in England, in which, when need be,
we may lodge.

“ For the Monastery of St. Patrick has frequently been, during the war, des-
troyed and burned, along with the church, which has commenced to be entirely
rebuilt, hence we very much stand in need of your assistance.”

There is given in Theiner’s “ Vetera Monumenta” a bull of Pope Innocent IV.,
dated March 5th, 1254. in which the Pope confirms a decision made by the
Primate, that the Abbey Church of Bangor was not the Cathedral of Down, but
that the Church of Down, of the Order of St. Benedict, was the cathedral, and that
to it alone belonged the right of electing the bishop.

The vacillating and unsettled system of government pursued during the reign of
Henry III., and the constant domestic and foreign wars in which the king was
engaged, weakened the English power in Ireland, and induced the Northern Irish to
hope that a favourable opportunity had at length come to drive them out of Ulster.
Bryan O'Neill, King of the Kinel-Owen. assisted by the Irish of Connaught, attacked
the town of Down which was defended by the Lord Justice, Stephen de Longespey.
The battle was fought on Sunday within the Octave of the Ascension, in the year
1260, at a place called * Druim Derg (the red ridge), near Dunda-leathghlas,” but
according to others, “ in the streets of Down.” It is not unlikely that it was fought
on the hill between Scotch-street and Irish-street. In the angle formed by these
streets, about seven perches to the rere of the former and sixteen to the right of the
latter, human bones were found in such quantities as to indicate a cemetery. Bryan
O'Neill and three hundred and fifty-two of the Irish, among whom were fifteen

