--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-094.png ---
74 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

Kilshanny, was some time after annexed to this house.™ The
founder died the same year."

1267. Donogh O’Brien, King of Thomond, was killed in
the battle that was fought at Siudaine;° he was solemnly in-
terred in this abbey, where a grand monument was erected
to his memory, the remains of which are to be seen at this day.P

1317. A dreadful battle was fought near this town, in which
many of the principal of the O’Briens fell; amongst the
slain were Teige and Mortogh Garbh, sons of Brien Ruadh,
King of Thomond.4

1418. The abbot John was made bishop of Kilmacduagh."

This abbey, with eleven quarters of land in Corcumroe and
Glanemanagh, was granted to Richard Harding.*

Inquisition 6th December, 25th Queen Elizabeth, finds that
Donogh M‘Murghe O’Brien, of Dromolan, in this county,
died seized of this abbey and all its possessions, annual value,
besides reprises, 40s. Irish money.

Ennis,** on the river Fergus, in the barony of Islands, is a
market and a borough town.

1240. About this time Donagh Carbrac O’Brien built a
very noble and beautiful monastery here for Conventual
Franciscan Friars."

1305. The “Annals of Inisfall” inform us, that this monas-
tery was built or repaired this year by Terlagh, the son of
Taigh Caoluiske O'Brien, who presented the friars with holy
crosses, embroidered vestments, and other needle work, cowls,
and every necessary furniture, beautiful book-cases, and blue

inted windows.”

1306. Died Cumheadha more Mac Nemarra. He was
interred with his King in this monastery.* This year Dermot,

™ War.mon. ®Lodge. vol. 1. p.251. °In the barony of Burren. ?Collectanen, No. 4
p.600. Ud. p.605. "War. Bishops, p. 648. "Auditor Gen. Office. *Wasanci called
‘Inis Cluanruada. “War, Mss. vol. 34, p. 159. War. mon. “The use y stained
glass in our abbeys, shows that the fine arts were at that time cultivated in this kingdom.
*Annal Inisfal.

4The Abbey of Ennis, or /nis Cluanramhfada, now a Protestant Church, was
situated in that part of the present town of Ennis called Church-street. Of the
history and splendour of this famous Abbey, as well as of. the other ecclesiastical
foundations now in ruins around Ennis, much might be written. Among them
may be noticed the ruins of the parish churches of Dromcliff, and Dura, and
Kilbrikane, all of undoubted antiquity. In an ancient manuscript in the Library
of Trinity College, Dublin, class a. 2-8, may be found an old poem ascribed to St.
Breacan Arand, whose first proper name was Breasal, son of Eochaidhe Ball Dearg,
King of Cashel. who was contempora with St. Patrick. In this poem we are
told that the King made an offering of his son Breasal to St. Patrick and to God ;
that St. Patrick then baptized him, and called him Breacan; that he kept him as
his own disciple, till finally prepared to receive ordination, and that Patrick him-
self gave him orders, after which he became the famous St. Breacan of Kil-
breakane, and in this poem he relates the circumstances under which he founded
the churches of Dura and Kilbrikane, near Ennis. See **Book of Lecain,” fol.
214, 4. 4, and MS. H. 2-8, T.C.D. See note at /usislact.

