--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-213.png ---
County of Donegall. 185

other ancient monuments of that kind ; fit objects for the de-
votion of pilgrims. The church is near to Eas-mac-eirc, a
remarkable cataract, which falls from a very high mountain
called Sliabh-snechta, or the Mountain of Snow, into the bay
called Traighe-brege.™

™ Tr. Th., p. 181.

the base of a mountain called Sliabh Sneachta, flows through the parish of
Donagh, and empties itself into the bay or estuary of Trawbreaga. In their
rapid flow the waters at a certain place meet with a rocky obstruction, which
makes them fret and leap over in a sheet of white foam; here, on the bank,
stood the Church of Domnach-Mor-Tochair. It is a lovely little glen where
the antiquarian will still find something to engage his attention. At the head
of it there is an odd-looking stone, and with it is connected a curious local
tradition. This glen, it appears, was enchanted ground, and was guarded by a
terrible serpent called Zochair. The story runs, that St. Patrick, on venturing
to enter the glen, was confronted by the serpent, whereupon he seized his crozier,
and, with the sharp end of it, cut some sacred emblems on a rough stone,*,which
he no sooner fixed at the entrance of the glen than the serpent disappeared. The
church of Domnach-Mor-Tochair has fallen from its ancient dignity and impor-
tance. St. Patrick made it an episcopal seat ; it is now, and has been for a long
time, the parish of Donagh in Inishowen. This parish, however, has been amply
compensated for the loss of its ancient dignity by the fame it has acquired from
being the birth-place of Colgan, the distinguished author of the Acta Sanctorum.
He was proud of his native parish, for he gives it a prominent place in one of his
writings, and mentions, with evident satisfaction, the fact of himself having been born
in it. In one of his notes on the “ Tripartite Life of St. Patrick,” he says, speaking
of Donagh :—‘ This was formerly a Bishop’ 's see of which the first bishop was
Mac Catthen, the brother of Mac Carthen, bishop of Clogher. /# the lands of this
very church Iwas born ; it is at this day only a parish church in the diocese of
Derry, and commonly called Domnach Glinne Tochair. It is frequented yearly
by a great concourse of people from the neighbouring country, and by pilgrims,
especially on the festival of St. Patrick, patron of the place. Here is to be seen
the penitential bed of St. Patrick, enclosed by rough stones, and there are other
ancient baat of that kind, which are frequently visited by a great number
of devout peo; The ancient monuments and relics of St. Patrick, which
Colgan here met des to with a sort of enthusiasm, as being numerous and well-
preserved in his time, hardly exist now. What has been done with them I can-
not imagine, unless we suppose that they were dug up, shattered and scattered
abroad to make room for the foundation of a Protestant church, which is now the
tomb of what remains of the once famous Domnach Glinne Tochair. In the tower
of this church there is a bell which the people believe to be the identical one used
by St. Patrick in the old church, but this is a groundless and a foolish impression,
for the bell does not possess a single mark that could lay claim to such antiquity.
In the townland of Carrowtemple close by, there is a very old stone slab with
figures sculptured on it, but they are worn into indistinctness by the wasting
action of time.

Among St. Patrick's disciples were two brothers of the same name, MacCarthen;
one he appointed to govern this church of Dommach Glinne Tochair, and the
other that of Clogher. In the Acta Sanctorum, p. 737, an incident is told of these
two brothers, which, because of its connection with the churches they governed,
is worth giving. The two brothers, when engaged in preaching with St. Patrick
in Connaught, ventured, without consulting their master, to consecrate a bishop.
The saint soon heard of the fact, and he then gave expression to the following
prediction :—“ Sedes unius vestrum pace et concordia, alterius vero potentia et
divitiis carebit.” And Colgan adds:—‘ Quod oraculum esse veracissimum rei
probat eventus : nam sedes Clocharensis discordia et contentionibus ; Domnachen-
sis vero rerum augustia et egestate laborat.”

I think there can be hardly a doubt as to the truth of Colgan’s conclusion, at all
events as regards Domnach Glinne Tochair.

