--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-217.png ---
County of Donegall. 189

Drumhome ,? on the bay of Donegall, in the barony of
Tyrehugh.

St. Ernan, who was named also St. Ernoc, or Mernoc, as we
are informed, was abbot of Druimthuoma. He died a very
old man on the first of January about the year 640. This
house had been a celebrated monastery.t Flahertach O’Mal-
dory, King of Tyrconnel, was buried here in 1197."

Drumholm is now a parish in the diocess of Raphoe.”

* Tr. Th., p. 938 and 940. "War. Annal, ~ Liber Visit.

8 Drumhome; in the Irish language it is Druim- Thuama, and in the Latin Dorsum
Thome, the name by which it is designated by Adamnan in his Life of St.
Columba, at the 23rd chap., Book ili., where he narrates the circumstances of
the happy death of St. Columba. He tells us that directly the saint breathed his
last, angels swept down from heaven filling the air with heavenly music, received
the pure soul after it had left its earthly tenement, and brought it with them back
through the clouds into the realm of light from which they had just descended.
While this was being enacted in Iona, a holy old monk, Eman or Emanus, for-
merly adisciple of St. Columbas, had a vision in his monastery of Dorsum Thome,
away in a remote corner of Ireland, in which he distinctly saw the angelic proces-
sion bearing the soul of St. Columba up through the clouds into heaven. Manus
O'Donnell, in his Life of his kinsman, St. Columba, gives an account of this vision
with the same attendant circumstances of its having occurred to St. Ernan of
Dorsum Thoma. To the name is annexed an explanatory note by Colgan, in
which he identifies the monastery. He says :—‘‘ Dorsum Thome was formerly a
celebrated monastery, now called Drumholme in Tyrhugh, a territory of Tircon-
nell, and now only a parish church of the diocese of Raphoe.” In another place
he gives a short biographical sketch of St. Ernan, and states that it was in the
monastery of Dorsum Thome he laboured, died, and was buried. In the Acta
Sanctorum, p. 7, he has the following :—“ St. Ernan, also called Ferreolus, of an
illustrious family, but more illustrious for his sanctity of life. . . . . . He,
with his brother Cabtachus, became a monk in Ireland under the direction of his
relative, St. Columba, and both were soon among the most distinguished of the
Saint’s disciples, Hence, when St. Columba resolved to go to convert the Picts
and Scots, he took with him twelve disciples, and among them the two brothers,
Eman and Cabtachus. But after the holy man Ernan had laboured many years
in spreading the Gospel, and had reaped a rich harvest, he returned, with tne per-
mission and blessing of St. Columba, to Ireland, and fixed himself at a place called
Druim Thuoma, in his own country of Tyrhugh, where he performed many labours,
until worn out by fasting and old age, he died and was buried in the church of
Druim Thuome. It was, therefore, a monastery of mark in those days, which is
also evident from the mention of it made in the ‘‘Annals” under the following
dates :—‘* A.D. 919, Cuisdh, son of Domhnall, abbot of Doire-Chalgaigh, and of
Drumi Thuama, head of the Council of Cinel-Conaill, died ; A.D. 1197, Flaherty
O’Muldory, Lord of Kinel-Connell, Kinel-Owen, and Oriel, defender of Tara,
heir-presumptive to the sovereignty of all Ireland, a Connell in heroism, a Cuchul-
lin in valour, a Guaire in hospitality, and a MacLughach in feats of arms, died on
Inis Saimer on the 2nd day of February, after long and patient suffering, in the
thirtieth year of his reign and fifty ninth of his age, and was interred at Drumhome
with due honour.” Nota trace of this monastery is now to be found in the parish ;
not a particle of local tradition exists regarding it ; even the memory of St. Eman
is forgotten, for all that remains of him now is his name given to a neat residence,
belonging to a Mr. Hamilton, built onan island at the mouth of Donegal harbour,
which is connected with the mainland by a causeway. How creditable to Mr,
Hamilton, a Protestant himself, is this practical expression of respect for the
memory of the old Irish Catholic Saints !

