--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-109.png ---
County of Clare. 89

for nuns following the rule of St. Augustin, and dedicated it
to St. John the Baptist Slaney, the daughter of Donogh
Carbreach, King of Thomond, was abbess of this nunnery,
and died A. D. 1260; she was pre-eminent in devotion, alms
deeds, and hospitality to all the women then in Munster.«

Kilshanny,;* In the barony of Corcumroe. The cell of
Kilshanny, alias Kilfonna, was annexed to the abbey of Cor-
cumroe.

This monastery, with all its appurtenances, mills and
fisheries, was granted to Robert Hickman.

Quin,® called also Quint, or Quinchy, is in the barony of
Bunratty, five miles east of Ennis.

‘War. mon. *Annal. Innisfal, Lodge, vol. 1, p. 251. ‘Rolls.

road to Kildysart. The ruin is still in pretty good preservation, and handsomely
situated near the north-eastern extremity of the beautiful lake of Killowne, in the
eae demesne of Killowne (New Hall), the seat of W. E. A. Mac-

nnell, 7

Near this abbey is a celebrated holy well, dedicated to St. John, on the eve of
whose festival it is much resorted to by the pious people of the surrounding country
as a place of pilgrimage and devotion to St. John.

Inquisition 15th May, II. King James, finds that King Henry VIIL, Ist July,
xxxv. of his reign, ited to Morrogh, Earl of Thomond, this abbey, with
three quarters and a quarter of land in this county, with all the appurte-
nances, viz., all the tithes in the parish of Killowne and Kilnekelly, worth
413 45. annual rent. Two parts of the tithes of Inishe and Clonrawde, containing
4 quarters of land ; 2 parts of the tithes between Bothes Clares; 2 parts of the
tithes in Kilmihil and Kilchreishe ; 2 parts of Mourghy, and the rectory thereof,
containing 4 quarters of land ; 2 parts of the tithes of Rathkerney, and 2 parts of
the tithes of 2 quarters of land near the noulet of Awne O’Gorna, in Ballyussin.
Ch-Remem,.—Archdall’s MS. Additions, Royal Irish Academy.

33 This monastery was situated in the parish of Killshanny, in the barony of Cor-
comroe, about two and a half miles north from Ennistymon, on the road to Kilfe-
nora. It was built by Donald More O’Brien, King of Thomond, about the year
1194, under the invocation of St. Augustine, for Cistercians, and endowed with
certain lands and privileges. St. Augustine is still venerated as the patron of the
parish. The ruins are yet in good preservation, and traditionally venerated by the
people of the surrounding country. There is a holy well at no great distance on
the south side, dedicated to St. Augustine, where a patron is still held on the 28th
of August, the feast of that saint.

The traditional history of the bells of St. Augustine, which were preserved here
till very recently, constitutes, perhaps, the most interesting part of the modern
history of this place. It was generally believed that to swear falsely by the bell
of St. Augustine was immediately followed by some remarkable manifestation of
the guilt of the person who had done so, and tradition has it that some persons
guilty of having sworn falsely upon Clog naomh Augustin (or St. Augustine’s

), were known to rise from their bed on the following day with their mouth or
face painfully distorted. This bell was preserved by a poor family in the village
of Kilshanny, who were known as the hereditary keepers of St. Augustine’s bell,
and who, b: fe, were considered to be entitled to a certain fee for the use of
the bell and for the proper administration of the oath. Within a recent period
the bells have been removed by some agency, not well known, and may be now
seen in the collection of antiquities in the British Museum.

For a further account of these bells, see ‘‘ Kilkenny Archaeological Journal” for
the year 1852-3, p. 61-2, &c., &c.

3 This ificent abbey was situated in the ancient territary of Clann Coillean,
or Mac Namaras of Thomond (who were its founders), in the present barony of

