--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-195.png ---
County of Derry. 169

granted to the abbot of Derry, with the supreme rule over
all the abbeys of the kingdom; but it is to be observed,
that the bishops of Conaught were not present at this
meeting.P

1161. The same abbot visited the country of Ossory,
and collected from that people 420 ounces of pure silver.4

1162. Died Cathasach, the son of Comaltan, a celebrated
doctor and professor of Divinity in this abbey." The same
year the King Murchertach Hua Lochluinn, and the abbot
Flathbert, removed the buildings which crowded this abbey ;
the abbot afterwards erected the stone enclosure called Cassiol
anurlair.*

1163. In the space of twenty days the abbot built a lime-
kiln seventy feet in dimensions every way, for burning lime
to repair the abbey ;* and the next year King Murchertach
and the abbot extended the greater church eighty feet, and
finished the whole work in the space of eighty days ;" the
time is reduced by some to forty.”

1166. An act unheard of in former, ages was perpetrated
about this time by Rory Mackany Mackillmorey O’Morna—
he destroyed, by fire, the greater part of the town of Derry,
with the church called Duibh-regles.*

1170. The town was again consumed by fire, but it seems
to have been accidental.Y St. Muredach O’Cobthaigh, bishop
of Derry and Raphoe,was interred in the Duibh-regles.* This
Muredach was present, as bishop of Kinel-eogain, in the
famous synod of Kells, held A.D. 1152; it seems, therefore, as
if the abbot Flathbert was raised by the synod of Brigh-mac-
thaighe to the episcopal dignity at large.

1175.Died the abbot Flathbert, after a tedious illness; he was
so highly esteemed for his learning and exemplary virtues, that
he was raised to the episcopal dignity, and the government
of the abbey of Hy was offered to his acceptance ;* he was
succeeded by Gilla M‘Tieg O’Branain.” Donogh O’Carillan
perfected a treaty of friendship with the abbey and town of
Derry, and granted to the convent a betagh townland near
Donaghmore, and certain duties to be paid them for ever.°

1180. Moelisa Hua Muredhuigh, professor of divinity in this
abbey, died in a respectable old age ;4 and the same year
Amlave, bishop of Kineleoguin was interred in this abbey, near
to his predecessor St. Muredach ; from hence it appears, that
the church called Duibh-regles is the same with the abbey

Tr. Th, p. 505. %Annal. Munst. * Tr. Th., p. 505. ‘id. */d, “Id.
¥ O'Flaherty Mss. * Tr. Th., p. 505. Annal. Munst. 1 Annal. Munst.
"Tr. Th., p. 505, and O'Flaherty Mss. *Tr. Th. ~. 505. ” Annal. Munst.
°Id. 4 Tr. Th. p. 505.

