--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-105.png ---
County of Clare. 85

Kilfarboy ;" in the barony of Ibrichan; is now a parish
church,

The monastery of Kilfobrick was founded A.D. 741.2 We
find that Cormac, bishop and scribe of Kilfobrick, died A.D,

837
*Conrys MSS. Act. SS. p. 360.

occupied by Matthew Slattery, Esq., of Newtown House, a small distance west of
the castle of Ennistymon on the same spot where once stood the Dun or palace of
Baoth Bronach, king of Corcomroe, who made an offering of himself and his family
and of his own palace, together with all his lands, &c., to St. AfacCreiche, for the
glory of God and the good of his own soul. St. MacCreiche here placed St. Mainchin

is disciple, who, it will be remembered, was chief actor in recovering the spoils of
Corcomroe, and who is said in this old life to have carried MacCreiche’s bell, the
Cuitech Fuait, and the staff of St. Luchtigern, on that occasion. In the absence of any
evidence to the contrary, it is not (I believe) too much to assume that on handing
over his staff (crozier) to S¢. Mainchin on this occasion, St. Luchtigern resigned to
him the abbotship of his church and town of Ennistymon, over which St. Mainchin
afterwards presided, and where he is still venerated as patron Saint of that parish.
St. MacCreiche at an earlier period founded two old churches near the present
village of Inagh, on the new road from Ennis to Ennistymon, and about seven miles
from the latter place, these were called Ci// sean botha and Teampull na-n-glas
aighne, hence it is called Zempull na-h-aighne, or church of Inagh. The ruined
walls of this last-mentioned church may be still traced in the churchyard of Inagh,
The former was a little west of it.

17 The monastery or church of Kilfarboy was situated in the parish of Kilfarboy

(to which it gives name), in the barony of Ibrikane, five miles south-south-west
rom Ennistymon, near Miltown Malbay. No trace now remains of the original
abbey, but the site is marked by the ruin of a more modem structure in the
churchyard or burial ground of Kilfarboy, which is pointed out on the Ordnance
Map of Clare, sheets 23 and 31, and described in the Ordnance Survey Papers, in
the Royal Irish Academy, vol. 1, page 334

According to Archdall and other writers, the monastery of Kilfarboy or
Kilfobric was founded A.D. 741, but there is good reason to suppose it was at
least a century older. St. Lachtain, patron of the parish of Kilfarboy, is comme-
morated in the Félire Aenguish, at 19th March, and at the same day the following
notice of him is given in O'Clery’s Calendar: “ Laécain mac coinbén abb achao
upd n-orpargid acar 6 bealaé feabpat anno ‘comin: 622. Lachtain, son of
Torben, abbot of Achad uir in Ossory, and of Bealach Feabrath, A.D. 622.”

Colgan gives a short life of this Saint at 19th March, but neither Colgan nor
O'Clery have attempted to identify Bealach Feabrath, where St. Lachtain is said
to have founded his church. O'Donovan, in his edition of the “‘Annals of the Four
Masters,” at the year 622, n. g, appears to think that Bealach Fobrath is the place
now called Ballagharay or Ballaghawry, a townland situated in the west of the
parish of Kilbolane, barony of Orbraighe, or Orrery, and county of Cork, but this
conjecture is highly improbable. Bealach Feabrath was the name of the moun-
tain pass (or road) which led from the place now called Miltown Malbay to the
territory of Corcomroe through that part of Hy-Breacain or Ibrikane, anciently
known as Bealach Feabrath where St. Lachtain built his church, Cill-Feabrath
or Kilfobric, anglicised Kilfarboy, which gave name to the townland and parish
of Kilfarboy, where his name is still venerated as patron of the parish. As St.
Lachtain died in the year A.D. 622, there can be no doubt that his church of
Kilfarboy must have been founded before that date, which makes it at least a
century older than the period assigned to it by Archdall.

The name of St. Lachtain is still vividly remembered in Kilfarboy, and all over
the west of Clare, and the peasantry still invoke his aid and protection in strife
and danger, and among them we find such phrases as the following :

When a strong or powerful person oppresses or afflicts a weak or helpless
person, the injured will say: ‘‘ Luigim fo spare 06 acc Fagbaim Laccain naomhca

