--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-050.png ---
32 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

his festival is kept. He was the son of Gorman, of the family
of Kinel-torbaich, z.¢., the O’Kelly’s.*

The abbot Toctech Hua Tigernaich, of Tirimchlair, died
the same year.*

812. Nuadhat, of: Loch Vamha,>™ anachorite, and abbot
and bishop of Armagh, went into Connaught this year, and died
February the 19th.°

814. Died Cumascac, son of Kernaigh, and ceconomist of
Armagh?

825. Died the abbot Flangus M‘Loingseach.°

826. Eogan Monasteriensis succeeded him.

829. Died Subneus, the son of Farnech; he enjoyed his
dignity only two months; he had been abbot of Darinis£®

Kethernac, the son of Dunchan, divinity lecturer and pres-
byter of Armagh, died the same year; he was honoured with
the epithet of THE WISE.»

831. Died Rectgal, the son of Subney, and a presbyter of
Armagh.

832. Died the abbot Artrigius ; he was the son of Con-
chovar.® Farannan succeeded him. And this year the Danes
plundered the town thrice in one month; they carried away
the reliques and all the other treasures, and obliged the abbot
to seek an asylum in Munster!

834. Died the abbot Eogan.™

Colgan says, that Farannan of Rath-mic-malus was chosen

* O'Flah. sup. Tr. Th. ibid. Act. SS. p. 373. *Tr. Th. ibid. Lough Gaun, in the
county of Longford, barony of Granard. °O’Flah. sup. Tr. Th. ibid. Act. SS. p.
359) 373- ‘Zr. Th. ibid. */d. ‘Id. p.295, %O’Flah. supr. Tr. Th. ibid. *Tr.
Th. p. 295. ‘Id. *Jd. ‘Ogygia p. 43. Annal Inisfal. ™O' Flak. supr. Tr. Th. ibid.

would abide by the award of Fothadh-na-Canoine ; on which occasion Fothadh
the decision by which he exempted the clergy of Ireland for ever from
expeditions and hostings, when he said:—

The church of the living God, let her alone, waste her not;

Let her right be apart, as best it ever was.

Every true monk who is of a pure conscience,

For the church to which it is due let him labour like every servant.
Every soldier from that out, who is without [religious] rule or obedience,
Is permitted to aid the great Aedh, son of Niall.

This is the true rule, neither more nor less:

Let every one serve in his vocation without murmur or complaint.”

17 The word Loch-Vamha signifies Lake of the Cave. The situation of this Lake
has not been fully identified, though it must have been well known in the days of
Colgan, who describes it as follows :—‘‘Est in finibus Breffnize occidentalis sive
inferioris, qu Breffne-Hi-Ruairc appellatur, hic lacus e vicina quadam specu,
unde et Loch-uamha, i.e., lacus specus appellatur, exoriens, et in eamdem szpe
prodigiose refluens: quod indigenz observant passim contingere pando illius
regionis Dynastis, eorumque filiis mortis imminet periculum.”—‘‘ Acta SS.” p. 373.

* Artrigius is made by Ware to succeed Mac Longsech in 822, and sit for eleven
years; but Eogan, of Monasterboice, who had the support of Nial Caille, King
of Aileach, appears to have disturbed him in the possession of the see.

