--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-096.png ---
76 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

Enniskerry® There are two islands of this name, about
three miles from the mainland of the barony of Ibrichan.

St. Senan of Iniscathy, built an abbey on Inifcaorach, in
the territory of Hybreccain,™ in Thomond."

Finish; an island in the river Shannon, where it receives
the river Fergus.

St. Brigid, the daughter of Conchraid, of the family of
Mactalius, presided over an abbey of nuns in the island of
Inisfidhe, or Cluainfidhe, in the sth century, in the time of St.
Senan.°

Gleanchaoin® This valley is in Hy Luigdheach in Munster,
at the bounds of the see of Killaloe. St. Patrick built an
abbey here.P

This place is now unknown.

Glancholuimchille® St. Columb founded this abbey; it is
now a parish church in the diocess of Kilfenora.4

Inchycronane,” is an island in the river Shannon. Donald
O’Brien, King of Limerick, founded an abbey in the island
of Inifcronane, for regular canons, about the year 1190.

This abbey, and a moiety of the tithes of the parish of
Inchycronane, were granted to Donogh, Earl of Thomond,

™ The barony of Ibrichan, Act. SS. p. §40. Act. SS. ~.541. Tr, Th. p. 612.
PAct. SS. p. 207. %Tr. Tr. ~. 495.

© The abbey (or church of Enniskerry) was situated on the Island of Jnis Caerach,
now Anglicised Enniskerry, and Mutton Island. There are two islands of the
name situated in the parish of Kilmurry and barony of Ibrikane, a short distance
from the mainland, off that part of the western coast of Clare, which from its
rocky and dangerous character is called Mal-bay>

In the Irish Lives of St. Senan it is called /nis Caerach-Ceoil, and St. Senan is
stated to have founded a church upon it, and to have left a party of his clerics
there. The ruins of an ancient church and round tower still mark the P , and
are popularly supposed to have been the remains of the primitive church founded
there by St. Senan of Inisscattery. The island contains about 210 statute acres
of land. See “ Ordnance Map of the County of Clare,” sheet 33.

This is the island of Fid-Jnnis, insula sylvae, situated in the mouth of the
Fergus. It is certainly the Fid-/#nés on which St. Senan built a church, accord-
ing to the ‘Ancient Life of St. Senanus,” published by Colgan; but there is
neither church nor graveyard on it at present, nor does any tradition survive of the
former existence of either. The only ruin at present on this island is a small
fi ent of a castle. This castle is mentioned in the College List as the Castle
of Finnis, belonging to Brian na Farraire O'Brien Sce ‘‘ Ordnance Survey
Papers,” R.I.A.

Gleanchaoin, now Glanquin, in the parish of Killenaboy, and barony of Inchi-
quin, a small distance to the north-east of the town of Corofin. The place is
pointed out on the “‘ Ordnance Map of the County of Clare,” sheet ro.

®Glancholuimchille, or Gleann-Choluim-Chille, i.e., Vallis Columbae Cillae.
The two townlands of this name, North and South, are situated on the east side
of the parish of Carran, in the diocese of Kilfenora, and in the barony of Burren,
on the north-east side of the county of Clare. The Ordnance Map marks the

weyard of St. Columkill’s church in ruins, Vide Reeves’ “ Adamnan's Life of
Gotan Cille,” p. 283, #. 23.

10 In the Irish Life of St. Senan, this island is mentioned: /is mor an Forrus
Tuascert, 3.¢., Inishmore in Jorrus North.

