--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-124.png ---
100 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

remain at Brigowne the walls of a church, built of large
blocks of a very fine freestone, brought with much labour
from the mountains, and the ruins of a round tower, which we
are informed fell about the year 1720. This church is sup-
posed by some to have been erected by St. Finchw; his staff
was kept here as an holy relique, and the adjacent country
people used to swear upon it! His festival is observed here
November 25th.*

Buttevant, in the barony of Orrery and Kilmore, was an

Smith, vol. 1, p. 353. * Calendar, vet.

Cruimpir, and Cill-na-Marb, and he blessed Cluain Aird Mobecoc, and Cluain
Fionnglaise, and he left Becan there, and he left the office of the holy church in
every church of them.” —‘ Life of Saint Aban O’C. MS., C.U.I.” p. 54.

Regarding the round tower which once adored this very ancient town, Father
Smiddy thus writes :—

“Tt must be admitted that, in not a few instances, human hands have assisted
the elements in obliterating all vestiges of many round towers. This was the
case with respect to the Round Tower of Roscarbery, of which not a trace now
remains ; and also with regard to the round tower which stood near the Church
of St. Finbarr, in the city of Cork. In the year 1720, a violent storm threw down
the Round Tower of Brigowne, near Mitchelstown, leaving standing of it only a
fragment or stump about fifteen feet high from the base. In that state it continued
till about fifty years ago, when this fragment was taken down, and the stones used
in the erection of a new glebe-house or parsonage in its immediate neighbourhood.
The Keystone or lintel over the door, which had on it an inscribed cross, the work-
men refused to take away ; and that is either buried in the adjoining cemetery, or
perhaps, forms there now the footstone of an unknown grave. St. Finneachan,
or Finchu, was, at an early period, bishop and abbot of Brigowne. His staff or
crozier was kept there for ages asa venerable relic ; and, of himself, there is in the
ancient Book of Lismore, a curious biography, replete, according to the taste of
the age in which it was written, with legends, wonders, and supernatural incidents.
Finncu means the fair hero or warrior, a name which, probably, he obtained
because, as this record of his life states, he had often, even on the battle-field, per-
sonally assisted his friends in the cause of right against might. The site of his
monastery was called Sruighe-amhane, which means the field or farm of the river.
Though the round tower and monastery have disappeared, the ruins of the old
church are still standing there, and the memory oP Finneachan himself lives
distinct and undying in the local traditions of the people.”—(‘‘The Round
Towers,” &c., page 195).

All Irish scholars will not agree with the learned writer as to his explanation
of the name Brigowne. Mr. Joyce, in his ‘Irish Names,” &c., page 356, gives
a different derivation :—‘‘ Bri (he says), signities a hill or rising ground, the
same as the Scotch word Brae. Brigowne, a village near Mitchelstown, in
Cork, once a celebrated ecclesiastical establishment, where are still to be seen the
remains of a very ancient church and round tower, is called in Irish Bri-gobhuns,
#.¢, the hill of the smith. In our present names, this word does not occur very
often : it is found simply in the form of Aree, in Donegal, Monaghan, and Wexford ;
while in Tyrone, it takes the name of Zrigh.” Gibson in his ** History of Cork,” ,
I1., 468, gives « still less plausible origin for this name. “ The parish may have
derived its ancient name from the mountain stream or river Bregog, of which
Spenser speaks.” 1t seems to me that as St. Abban has been from time immemorial
the patron of this place, its name might easily be explained as Brigh-Abhaun, i.¢.,
“the hill of St. Abban.”

9° Buttevant.—Inquisition 3rd of St. Hilary, XX XI. Elizabeth, finds that a grant
was made to David Barry, Viscount, of this friary, at the annual rent of 36s. 8d.
Irish, but that the same was forfeited by non-payment of the rent.

Buttevant is situated in the parish of that name, in the barony of Orrery and

