--- 7bae835f-2ea0-4303-b235-f423bb780ad8-237.png ---
County of Donegall. 205

Kil O'Donnell“ near Rathmellan, in the barony of Kilma-
crenan. About the beginning of the 16th century O’Donnell
built a small monastery here for friars of the third order of
St. Francis.!

! War. Mon, Allemande.

to you a kinder and more munificent master than the hair-brained young chieftain
who has just perished in his crimes.’ ‘ Your offer,’ replied Sir Phelim, ‘is a damn-
able one, and let me remind you that in making it to me now, after the loss of my
beloved master, and of all my fortune and inheritance besides, is a crime of
unfathomable guilt, because it suggests the terrible wickedness of making God
my enemy, and thus lead a life here of racking misery, and hereafter commit
myself to eternal punishment. Proceed at once to employ your executioners in
torturing this body of mine, already enfeebled by wounds. I rejoice to be able
to make an offering of it to Jesus Christ in satisfaction for my sins. Yes, I rejoice
and give thanks to God for the ineffable favour of having afforded me this oppor-
tunity of shedding my blood for that loving Saviour who poured out his blood,
even to its last drop, for me.’ The Lord-Deputy, fired with rage at these defiant
words, ordered a gallows to be erected, and all the preparations for immediate
execution to be got ready. Sir Phelim ascended the ladder with intrepid step, and
having advanced to the front of the platform, spoke in nervous and feeling language
to the Catholics who were there assembled. He implored them to pray fervently
for him to get grace to seal with his blood the glorious confession of the faith
which Christ bequeathed to him and them. He then gently submitted himself to
the executioner, who, after pinioning his arms and fastening the rope around his neck,
withdrew the bolt, and let fall the drop. The body leaped out into the air with
a sudden jerk ; the rope snapped in two, and Sir Phelim fell heavily on his feet.
A cry of horror rose from the spectators ; the executioner rushed at his victim with
a hatchet; Sir Phelim only staggered under his blows ; two soldiers ran to the assist-
ance of the executioner, and in a short time felled the powerfully-built man to the
ground. The mangled victim, with dying voice, again implored the Catholics to
pray for him ; his fine figure and handsome face elicited the admiration and pity of
the crowd ; there were exclamations of shame, subdued curses, angry menaces, and
long low wailings during the progress of this butchery. The executioner soon
brought his work of blood to a close ; he plunged a knife into Sir Phelim’s breast,
cut it open, tore out his heart, and flung it into the fire kindled near him, and
thus put a glorious end toa grand and glorious life.” This tragic account reads
like a chapter in the history of the early Christian Church. The Roman tyrants
and their infamous minions, in their thirst for Christian blood, did not torture their
victims with more refined cruelty than what was exercised at Lifford, in a
civilized age, on this noble Irish chief, for refusing to renounce the faith bequeathed
to him by his fathers. The early Christian martyrs, like Sir Phelim, were
offered glittering honours and dazzling wealth if they renounced the faith of Christ ;
like him they flung back the offer with scorn; and like him their bodies were
hacked, they were disembowelled. their hearts were torn out and cast into the fire.

The clan MacDevitt had to fly from the face of the English after the execution
of Sir Phelim. Their castle of Aielach, near Derry, and the lands they possessed
on the banks of the Swilly and Foyle, and away in the distant Inishowen, were
confiscated and handed over by James I. to the ‘‘ undertakers.” The famil
took refuge in the remote glens of Donegal, where their descendants fondly cheris
the memory of their illustrious chieftain and martyr.

17 Kill O'Donnell, There is a record in the ‘‘Annals” of this abbey under
A.D. 1538. | ‘‘ Hugh Boy O’Donnell. son of Hugh Duv, son of Hugh Roe, heir
to the lordship of Tirconnell, a man who was well skilled and learned in every
science, who was most distinguished for munificence and hospitality, for prowess in
the field of battle and the gap of danger, and who was expected, from his steadiness
and other characteristics, to attain to the lordship of his own country (Tirconnell),
died at Cill O’d’Tomhrair on the 22nd of March, after having received the
communion and extreme unction.” O'Donovan, in a note on this passes;
tells us that Cill O’d’Tomhrair rendered into English is ‘‘ Church of the Towers.”

