--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-240.png ---
214 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

out the walls, was the Monastery of St. Mary of the Hill, a
daughter to that of the Holy Trinity of the Premonstratenses
of Tuam. On the nuns forsaking it, the secular clergy entered
into and kept possession for a considerable time ; but on the
petition of the inhabitants of the town to Pope Innocent VIII.,
it was granted to the Dominican friars, by a Bull dated 4th
of December, 1488. There are no remains of this foundation,
save the cemetery, the whole building having been demolished
by the townsmen, in the year 1652, in order to prevent Oliver
Cromwell from turning it into a fortification against them-
selves."

Augustinian Friary: Was founded on ahill near this town,
by Stephen Lynch, son of Dominick Duff (who was many
times Mayor of Galway), and Margaret, his wife, in the year
1508, at the earnest solicitation of Richard Nangle, a friar of the
same order, who afterwards became Archbishop of Tuam.!

A Carmelite Friary ; 1s said to have been founded here by
one of the Burghs."

N We cannot learn any other account of it.

Nunnery ; Was situated in an island in Lough-Corrib, to
the west of the town.”

‘We are as much in the dark with respect to this nunnery as
to the friary.

Immagh ;" An island on the coast of the county, which

annie Pp» 323 and 325: * Registr. Loct., King, p. 423. "Burke. © Pococke’s

7 The island Zmay, called in Irish ‘‘ Iomaidh,” or ‘‘ Iomaidh Feichin,” is now
Anglicized Omay. St. Fechin, patron of Fore, in Westmeath, founded a
monastery here in the seventh century. It is recorded that the last of the pegans
of Ireland were converted here by St. Fechin. They are described by Dr. Lynch
as “homines nudi, qui non sciverunt nisi carnes et pisces; qui non fuerunt
Christiani nec audiverunt unquam de Christo.” Near it on the mainland are the
ruins of the church of Athdearg, in Irish ‘‘Teampull Athadeirg,” i. ‘the
Church of the Red Ford,” so called from a mountain stream of a reddish colour
which flows into that inlet of the ocean now called Streamstown Bay, north-east of
Ballymac-Conry. O’Flaherty, in ‘‘ West Connaught,” page 113, gives the fol-
lowing account of Imagh:—‘ The island of Imay lies in the sea, so as at low water
it can be entered dry foot. Within it there is a pool of standing water, and the
soil is plain and champaign. St. Fechin erected” an abbey therein, but now the

arish church alone is extant, whereof St. Fechin is patron, honored on the 20th

anuary, whose well is here visited, which of late proves very miraculous for
restoring of health. St. Fechin, abbot, native of Luguy (Luquy), in the County
of Sligo, and of the same monastery of Fothart with St. Bridget of Kildare, was
founder of several abbeys; the chiefest of which are Fore, in Westmeath, Easdara
(now Ballysadare), in Sligo, and Cong. From Easdara he came to Imay, and his
memory is kept in several places of this country. He died of the plague which in
the year 664 began in Ireland after the 20th of, anuary.” This pestilence, called
the ‘‘ Buidhe Connaill,” is famous in the Irish Annals. See Four Masters, A.D.
664. Usher (Primordia, page 966), by a singular mistake, confounds “‘ Fabhar,”
the ancient name of Fore, mW, ‘estmeath, with “ Leabhar,” the Irish for ‘‘ a book,”
and hence writes: “Eum Vulgo Feichin Fabhair, ab habitationis loco quem latine
Favoriam, Hibernice Belle-Cathair, quasi Kiriath-Sepher in Josue xv., 15, aut
‘urbem librorum’ dixeris appellatum invenio.” Drs. Lanigan and Archdall

