--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-174.png ---
150 Ancient Monasterics of Ireland.

658. Sillan, bishop of Daivinis, died May 17th.*

746. Died Keledulaffius of Daminis.'

822. The Danes plundered this island, and spared not the
abbey.*

834. They repeated their devastations.'

867. Died the learned Martin; he was a scribe of this
abbey.

868. Died Moyledor, anchorite and scribe."

894. Died Fogartach, another scribe.°

917. Died the abbot St. Queran.?

961. The island was again plundered this year.9

995. Died the abbot Cormac Hua Congaile."

1025. Died Christian, the professor of this abbey.*

1157. In this year we find that the abbey, although not
wholly consumed, was much hurt by fire.t

1360. It also suffered much from fire this year."

» Act. SS. index. ‘Id. “Ann. Munst. ' MGeogh. ™ Tr. Th. p. 632.
= M-Geogh. _° Tr. Th. index. ° M'Geogh. Tr. Th. p. 633. Act. SS.
p- 360. * Tr. Th. p. 632. * Id. p. 633. “dd.

that year. His name appears in all our Martyrologies on 12th September. and
his monastery was regarded as one of the most famous in the kingdom. The
Feliré of St. Aengus, in the Leashar Breac, gives the following quatrain as com-
posed by St. Molaise in praise of Devenish :—

“ Good is the discovery we have made ;
A broad lake with mountain and field—
A general cemetery for the Gaedhil ;
The rightful residence of God the Father.”

In the Royal Irish Academy there is a transcript of a very ancient Irish Life
of our saint, from which we take the following particulars :—He was seventh in
descent from Crund Badrai, King of Uladh, by whom Muiredhach Tireach, King
of Ireland, was slain. St. Molaise’s mother is called Monoa, or Monollain. She
was daughter of Midhloca of the Corca-Raidhe (a tribe seated in the barony of
Corkaree, county Westmeath) who was descended from the regal stock of Tara
and of Cashel. The following is the account of the saint’s birth:—‘‘Molaise’s mother
saw a vision in the night, viz., that she had found seven sweet apples, and the last
of them which she took in her hand, she could not hold it on account of its bulk,
and it seemed to her that gold was not more beautiful than this apple. She told
her vision to her husband. ‘I understand it,’ he replied.; ‘ you will bring forth an
illustrious son, who will excel ail his contemporaries.’ In the meantime, the period
of her travail came, and a druid said to her : ‘If the birth of your child is delayed
till after sunrise to-morrow, he shall be an illustrious, dignified, miraculous, truly
righteous, and truly noble man ; and the son whom thou wilt bring forth will be
a man of blessing and salvation to the western world.’ The true God detained the
infant in Monoa’s womb until.she brought him forth at Airiud-Bhairr, upon the
flagstone, after sunrise on the morrow. And he was brought to Bishop
Eochaidh, who baptized and blessed him, and it was this bishop that conferred the
first orders on him afterwards.” From his earliest years, the grace of the Holy
Ghost shone forth in him, and he often spoke the praises of God. As he grew up,
he was remarkable for his charity, bestowing even his meals on the poor for the
love of his Creator ; he fasted most ri idly, and so great were the austerities of his
Penitential life, that “ his body was reduced to mere skin and bone.” The sons of

eclan visiting him, he besought them to write a Soscel,ie., a copy of the Gospels
for him. They did so, and completed the whole Gospels in two days, the light

