--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-249.png ---
County of Galway. 223

the winter months the friary was surrounded by the inun-
dations of the river."

In the year 1203, we are told that William de Burgh
marched at the head of a great army into Connaught, and so
to Milick, and there profanely converted the church into a
stable, round which he erected a castle of a circular form,
wherein he was seen to eat flesh meat during the whole time
of Lent.”

The monastery of Milick was afterwards granted to Sir
John King, who assigned it to the Earl of Clanricarde.*

Mucinis >> Regulus, who was living in the time of the
great St. Columb, was abbot of Mucinis, in Lough-Derg,
bordering the County of Galway ; his festival is held here on
16th of October.”

Oran ; See County of Roscommon.

Pallice ; Situated about eleven miles north-west of Por-
tumny.

At Kaltragh-ne-Pallice was a friary dedicated to the Virgin
Mary, for friars of the Order of Mount Carmel, or White
Friars.* It was founded by Birmingham, Baron of Athenry,
in the 14th century.*

August 27th, 31st Queen Elizabeth, a grant was made to
John Rawson of this priory, with a church and a ruinous
chapel, called Graige-I-Corrie ; a quarter of land, and sixty
acres of arable, together with sundry other lands in this
county, to hold the same for ever, in free soccage, at the
annual rent of £81 12s. 7d. Irish money.”

Portumna ; a town on the river Shannon, where it falls into
Loughderg, in the barony of Longford.

The monks of the Cistercian Abbey of Donbrody, in the
county of Wexford, had for a long time a chapel here, which
was dedicated to St. Peter and St. Paul; but being at length
forsaken by them, O’Madden, dynast of the country, gave it
to the Dominican Friars, who, with the approbation of the
monks of Donbrody, erected a friary here and also a church,
which they dedicated to the Blessed Virgin and the original
patron saints; at the same time they built a steeple, cemetery,
and all other necessary offices. Pope Martin V. granted a
Bull to confirm their possessions, dated 8th October, 1426;

° War. Mon, ~ Ann. Munst. Contr. * Harris's Tab. 7 Act. SS. p. 339-
Tr. Th. Index, * War. Mon. * Allemande. » Aud. General.

% The name of St. Regulus, in Irish Riaghail, is entered in the Martyrology or
Donegal, on the 16th of October :—‘‘ Riaghail, Abbot of Muicinis, in Loch
Deirgdheire.” He isalso commemorated in the Feliré of dingus with the strophe -—
“Riaghail, gifted was his career.” His Acts are inserted in the Breviary 9
Aberdeen, and he is especially honoured in St. Andrew’s, in Scotland, on M
30th and October the 17th.

