--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-220.png ---
194 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

Ardoilen.> The third of the isles of Arran was anciently
called Aracoemhain, and took its name from St. Coemann,
the patron of it.

Three churches were erected here, that of Kil-choemhain,
where St. Columb is honoured ; another dedicated to St. Paul,
and the third, called Kil-gradh-an-domhain, in which St.
Gobnata is honoured on the 11th of February.

Kil-choemhain was a monastery of note, and was founded
by St. Fechin.

The abbot St. Gormgal, justly celebrated for his piety, died
A.D. 1017, on the 5th of August, on which day his feast is
held ;* from hence we must conclude, that this abbey existed
several ages.

Franciscan Friary ; Was founded on one of these islands in
the year 1485.'

Athenry ;~ Gives name to the barony, and is a market and
borough town, sending burgesses to parliament.

Dominican Friary § Meyer de Bermingham, the second
baron of Athenry, gave to the Dominican friars 160 marcs, to
assist in building this house, and granted the land whereon to
erect it ; he also presented to them (on the completion of the
building, as we suppose) a hogshead of wine. De Ber-
mingham was induced to begin this work by letters from
St. Dominick; and a noble monastery was erected here,

* Act. SS. pp. 135, 141, 714, and 715. * Act. SS. p. 715, and Allemande.
° Called also Athnery, Aghnary, Athunree, and Athenree.

® As Colgan fell into the error of giving the name of Ardoilen to the third of the
Aran Islands, Archdall and Lanigan were betrayed into the same mistake. All
that is said in the text, except what relates to St. Gormgal, belongs to the group,
and not to Ardoilen. Ardoilen is an island of difficult access, off the Galway
coast, opposite Imay, or Omey, and is at present uninhabited. Here St. Fechin
founded a monastery formerly of great repute: its ruins still remain. Several
ancient stone crosses erected there prove it to have been a favorite burial-place of
the chieftains of the neighbouring territory. There are in the island some stone
houses or cells called cloghans, which show that its first religious community
dates from a very early period. The second Life of St. Fechin (chapter 22nd),
states that the saint, after completing the Monastery of Imaidh (é.¢., Omey),
founded another religious house in Ardoilen. On this passage Colgan has added
the note—‘ This island is also in the ocean, and is distant afew leagues towards
the west from Immagia (Omey), and after St. Fechin. St. Gormgal, a man of
renowned sanctity, who died in the year 1017, on the 5th day of August, on which
day, according to Marianus, his natalis is kept, ennobled it very much by his
anachoretic virtues and most pious life. The elegant and very religious poem of
blessed Corranus (who flourished at the same time), concerning his praises and.
relics, is extant in my possession.”—Acéa, p. 141, n. 13. Elsewhere he gives the
following list of holy men who rest with St. Gormgal in Ardoilen, viz.—Moelsuthun,
Celechair, Dubthach, Dunadach, Cellach, Tressach, Ultan, Maelmartin, Coromach,
and Conmach. The Four Masters, recording the death of St. Gormgal in Ardoilen
in 1017,style him the chief Anmchara, #.¢. soul's friend or confessor, of all Ireland.—
See Hardiman’s notes to O'Flaherty’s W<st Connaught, p. 114.

® A copy of the Regestum of this monastery is preserved in the British Museum,
Sloane MSS., 4,784. The Annals of Lough-Cé register the death of William
O’Cinaedha, prior of the town of Athenry, in 1581.

