--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-181.png ---
County of Fermanagh. 155

At the dissolution of religious houses, the possessions
belonging to this pricry were found to be as follows :—The
circuit and precinct of the priory, with an orchard adjoining ;
a church and a building joining to it, together with a cellar
under that building, and some chambers lately built thereon,
and also some other small buildings ; an orchard, with a small
garden and a few closes, containing three acres, within the
said precincts ; the whole island of Devenish, containing thirty
acres of small measure, four tates of old measure, with their

1387), “and Daimhinis in Feara-Manach. He was a son of Aenghus (son of
Nadfraech, son of Corc, son of Lughaidh), who was King of Munster ; and
Eithne, daughter of Crimhthann Cosgrach, was his mother, according to his own
life. It was to him God gave water from the hard stony rock when great thirst
had seized him, and Meadhog of Ferna, with the monks of both, when he made
a distant cast of his crozier at the hard stony rock, so that a stream of pure
spring water gushed therefrom ; just as the spring is now to be seen at Cill-Naile,
according to Naile’s own life, chap, to.” [This is the well referred to by O'Dono-
van as being still inexistence.] _“ The Life of Co/um-Cille, chap. 90, states that
Naile came into the presence of Colum-Cille for the first time, at the Inbher,
and that Colum-Cille and Naile blessed the place, and that it is from Naile
the church has been thenceforth named,’ In the Donegal Inquisitions and
Ecclesiastical Returns, it is always called the parish of Inver-nale.

The following entries taken from the Four Masters are wanting in Archdall's
text -—

ABBOTS AND CoMHARBAS OF DEVENISII.

A.C. 815. Reachtabhra-Ua n Andola, abbot of Daimhinis, died.

A.C. 867, Martin, abbot of Cluain-mic-nois and Daimhinis, a scribe of the sept
of Dartraighe-Daimhinsi (correctly Coininnsi), died.

A.C. 890. Loichene, abbot of Daimhinis, died.

A.C. 891. Maelachaidh, vice-abbot, ée., prior of Cluain-mic-nois, and abbot of
Daimhinis, suffered martyrdom from the Dealbhna-Eathra; and he took an oath
at his death, that he had no part in the killing of Scolaighe. This Scolaighe was
son of Macan, Lord of Dealbhna-Eathra, in the now King’s County, who had been
slain by the people of Clonmacnoise the year before.

A.C. 922. Maelmordha, son of Conghalach, abbot, died.

A.C. 944. Maelbeathadh, abbot, died.

A.C. 955. Colman, son of Conghal, successor of Molaise of Daimhinis, died.

A.C. 972. (recte, 974) Diarmaid, son of Dochartach, abbot, died.

A.C. 984. Fogharlach Ua Conghaile, a distinguished scribe and abbot, died.

A.C. 995. Cormac Ua Conghaile, abbot, died.

A.C. toor. Cathalan Ua Corcrain, abbot, died.

A.C. 1025. Ceannfaeladh, son of Flaithbheartach, successor of Molaisi ; and
Gillachrist, its rector, died. .

A.C. 1038. Colman Caech Ua Conghaile, successor of Molaisi, died.

A.C. 1049. Maelcainnigh Ua Taichligh, Comharba of Daimhinis, died.
O'Donovan writes that this name is now anglicized Tully and Tilly. In 1347,
Maelmaedhog O’Taichligh was official of Lough Ere.

A.C, 1114. Flann Mac Fla nchadha, now Mac Clancey and Clancy, successor
of Molaise, died.

A.C, 1168. The great priest, Ua Mongachain, successor of Molaisi, died.

A.C. 1336. O’Mechin, Coarb of St. Molaisse, died. O’Donovan in his note on
this entry writes however, that he was the coarb of the Church of Ballaghmeehin,
in the parish of Rossinver, in the north of the county of Leitrim, where his linea
descendant and representative still farms the termon lands. According to the
Fermanagh Inquisitions there was in that county a family named O’Manchan.

A.C. 1390. Niall O’Taichlich, Canon Chorister of Clogher and Coarb of
Devenish, died.

