--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-266.png ---
238 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

St. Finian Lobhar, or the Leper, son of Alild, King of
Munster, and disciple of St. Brendan, founded an abbey here
towards the close of the 6th century.'

A.D. 640. This year St. Dichull, the son of Nessan, was
abbots

1145. Died Flannan of Innisfallen.*

1180, This abbey, says our annalist, being ever esteemed a
paradise and a secure sanctuary, the treasure and most valu-
able effects of the whole country were deposited in the hands
of its clergy ; notwithstanding which, we find the abbey was
plundered in this year by Maolduin, son of Daniel O’Donag-

* Act. SS. pp. 4b and 628. © Id. p.92. —* Annal Annon.

mother of Finan.” He was a native of Ely O’Carroll, at present a barony in the
King’s County, but in early times belonging to East Munster. He was of noble
descent; and O’Clery, in his MS. Book of Genealogies of the Saints of Erin,
styles him, “the son Conall, son of Eathnach, son of Tadhg, son of Cian,
son of Oilioll Oluim ;” but adds that many links are wantmg—‘“ malta in
hac genealogia desunt.” He pursued the paths of holiness in the monasteries
of St. Brendan in Kerry, and in St. Columba’s monastery at Swords, which
monastery he also ruled as abbot for many years. He was famed for miracles,
and is said to have raised three persons to life. Desirous of ,martyrdom,
he took upon himself the loathsome leprosy of a child that was brought to
him to be cured, and endured it joyfully till his death. He lived for some
time in the Monastery of Clonmore Moedhog, in the County Carlow—(see
notes to vol. i., Pree 5), and is supposed to have died there. Some ancient
writers attest, that that monastery was further enriched with his relics :
others assign that treasure to Swords. It is probable that a portion of his relics
was deposited at each monastery. As early as the eighth century, when the
Martyrology of Tallaght was composed, it was doubtful which monastery had the’
higher claim to celebrate his feast. The text of that Martyrology as published by
Dr. Kelly, which, however, was taken from a very corrupt and imperfect transcript,
gives merely the entry—‘* Finan, Lobhar, at Swords :” but in the original text as
reserved in the St. Isidore’s fragment of the Book of Leinster, we have, “ Finani
bhar, Suird vel Cluainmor,” é.¢., “ St. Finan, the leper, at Swords or Clonmore.”
Our saint cherished special piety towards the great founder of the monastery of
Clonmore, St. Aidan, and when the close of life was at hand was favored with the
following vision. “‘ He saw,” writes his biographer, ‘a wonderful chariot descending
from heaven to the Monastery of St. Aidan, and in it a venerable man in religious
attire, with a radiant virgin beside him. ‘I am Aidan, servant of Christ’ said the
venerable senior addressing him, ‘and this is the holy virgin Brigid,-protectress of
Erin (Brigida domina Hiberniae); my feast will be celebrated to-morrow, and hers
on the following day : and we are come to bless those who honour us. Be thou
prepared and joyful, for the following day thou shalt migrate to heaven.’” This
would fix the day of the saint's death as the 2nd of February, but that day being
engaged by another great feast, his memory was venerated on the 16th of March.
It is not easy to fix the precise year of his rest. His life merely states that he died
in the reign of the Monarch Finnachta, who reigned from 675 to 694. From the
facts narrated in his life, it is probable that he died at a very advanced age, soon
after the year 675. His memory was cherished in many churches of Scotland, for
which see Dr. Forbes’s Calendar of Scottish Saints, page 347-

It is scarcely necessary to add that the Monastery of Tnnisfallen was not founded
at so early a date as that assigned by Archdall. Neither was St. Dichull abbot of
our monastery : he was abbot of the Monastery of Ireland's Eye, which, in early
records, is sometimes called Inisfaithlenn. See Colgan’s remarks on “the Sons of
Nessan,” at 15th of March.

