--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-231.png ---
County of Galway. 205

Crevaghbane ; Here was a friary of Carmelites,* which, if
we mistake not, owes its erection to an Earl of Clanricarde, in
the 14th century!

This monastery, with a quarter of land—sixteen acres of
arable and twelve of pasture—in the town and lands of Cre-
vaghbane, together with the Abbey of Mayo, was granted to
the burgesses and commonalty of the town of Athenry—See
Mayo’

Dundrynan > Thomas was abbot of the Monastery of the
Blessed Virgin Mary of Dundrynan in the year 1374, and
2gth of the reign of King Edward III." Wecan find no other
account of this abbey.

Dunmore ; Gives name to the barony, and is situated six
miles north of Tuam.

St. Patrick built here the Monastery of Domnagh-padraig,
and appointed St. Fulartach bishop of it! A friary for
Augustine Eremites was afterwards founded on the site of the
old abbey, by Walter de Bermingham, Lord Athenry, in the
year 1425! :

The whole of this edifice cannot now be_ traced;
part of it was converted into a parish church; the
remaining part was levelled, and now forms the market-
place.

Henry Mossop, the celebrated actor, was born in this town ;
his father was rector of Dunmore, and an eminent mathema-
tician.

* War. Mon. * Allemande. * Auditor-General. ™ King, p.140. ' Act. SS. p.
788. * War. Mon. Allemande, and Lodge, vol. iv. p. 11. Calendar.

ut The Patent Rolls make frequent mention of the Abbey “de Dundrequan in
Galwey,” but this is probably the famous Abbey of Dundraquan in Galloway in
Scotland. It was the last place in her kingdom in which Mary Queen of Scots
found shelter. In the Patent Rolls of 12th of Richard II., Thomas Gower, clerk,
received the care of the Jands in the County Meath that belonged to the Abbot of
“ Dundrequan in Brittounstowngalwey.” In the following year, Thomas Gower
was removed, and Robert Sutton succeeded to the custody of those lands. By
Patent of 6th of Henry IV., reversion of these lands after Robert Sutton was

nted to R. Sydgrave; and in the Trim Inquisition, 20th March, 1621, Walter
Sedgrave, of Dublin, alderman, was found ‘‘seized of Bartanstowngalwey, in County
Meath, containing 90 acres arable.”

18 Dunmcre, which means the great fort, derives its name from the great fortress
of the Kings of Connaught which was situated here. There still remain the ruins
of a Jater castle built by Mebric, one of the early Welsh adventurers, and subse-
quently held by the Berminghams, barons of Athenry. In the reign of Elizabeth,

e Berminghams rose in arms against the queen, but their castle was besieged and
taken in 1569. It was finally “Fismantled in Cromwell's time. As regards the
Augustinian friary, there is a curious Memorandum in a Patent Roll, 33rd of
Henry VIIL, ‘‘that whereas the Lord Bermyngham of Athenry, in Conacde, hath
under him a poor monastery of Augustine friars in the town of Downemore, it is
considered (by the council) that the said monastery shall stand, and that three or
four of the co-brethren, changing their habit toa secular habit, shall have said
house, &c., during the king’s pleasure.” Signed, 7th July, an. 33.

