--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-193.png ---
County of Fermanagh. 167

him and his lineal heirs for ever. In this deed, a fine was
ordered of cows to the O’Hosies and M‘Crifferties, the
poets, who were to reprove, infame, and reprehend, in their
satiric writings, every disturber of the friars, otherwise the
ordinary fine of 20 cows was to be levied out of their own
proper goods and lands. At the perfecting of this deed,

urlogh O'Neill, Lord of Tyrone ; Hugh McManus O'Donnell,
Lord of Tirconnell ; Cuchonnaght Maguire, Lord of Ferma-
nagh; Brian McBrian O’Roirk, Lord of the Breiny ; and
Daniel McTaig O’Conor, Lord of Lower Connaught, were
present ; as also Connor McCardell, Bishop of Clogher ; and
Owyn O’Duffie, Minister Provincial. Maguire afterwards
began to rebuild the abbey in a most agreeable and eligible

He was, however, betrayed at the very outset, and committed to the tower of
London, where he was executed in 1644. A short time before execution, he made
his will, which clearly proves that he never forgot the convent on the shore of
Lough Eme, before whose altar he often knelt in youth, and at which he desired
to be rememl ered after his heroic soul had gone to its account :—

“I doenjoin my said heirs and executors, to make equal distributions, and give fifty
pounds to those convents or friaries following :—that is, Lisgool, twenty pounds ;
ten pounds to sundry of the convents of Ardmagh, Cavan, and Monaghan ; and
that to have Masses said for my.soul. And I do most ardently pray that this
money be given with the greatest s) that may be... ..

“ I'do desire those, my friends herein mentioned, and all other my friends, to
have many Masses and prayers said for my soul ; and, last of all, [do appoint this,
my will, to be and remain in custody of the friars of Lisgool, whom I entreat to
keep it safely in their custody, until it pleases God that the contents be fulfilled ;
and also, to send authorised copies of it to each of those, my friends, entrusted and
mentioned by me as above mentioned. I do likewise beseech the said Friars to
solicit, frequently and earnestly, all those that ought from time to time to fulfil
and perform this, my last will and testament, to be mindful of their duties in dis-
charging their parts ; and also, I do desire the said friars to be mindful always in
all their Masses and prayers to pray for my soul... . .

“ What is in this paper contained, although with many blots and interlinings, is
my last will and testament, and so I desire it may be confirmed and taken to all
intents. I did intend to have it fairly written after this form and meaning herein
contained, but that I was denied this. I enjoin and desire it may be fulfilled in
all as if it had been fairly engrossed, and to that intent I now have put my hand
and seal to this draft the day and year above written.

‘©CoNNOR ENNISKILLEN.”

Mr. Wakeman (Lough Erne, p. §7) thus writes :—‘‘ Before us we have Lisgoole
Abbey (Lisgoole, ‘the fort of the river fork’), once a monastery of considerable
note, but at present the seat of —— Jones, Esq. The foundation of the abbey is
of early date : of the old building a very small portion has been incorporated in
the modern house. Indeed, nearly every trace of monastic character disap-
peared, even the graveyard being devoted to agricultural purposes. Of the date
of the dissolution of Li: le we have not been able to trace any information.
Probably the community may have been obliged to remove to some other site, still
keeping up the old name. The Rev. G. N. Wright states in 1834, that a chalice,
formerly belonging to Lisgoole Abbey, is still preserved in the family of a learned
member of the medical profession, a well-known and much esteemed resident in
Enniskillen, bearing the following epigraph :—

**¢ This chalice was given by Sir Bryan Maguire, Knight of the Noble Order
Militaire of St. Louis, for the use of the Convent of Lisgoole, in the county of Fer-
managh, near Inniskilling, Anno Domini 1739.’”

The Maguires’ arms and motto, Pro Deo e patria, were engraved beneath.


