--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-209.png ---
County of Galway. 183

churches on it ; and about the year 490 he was abbot of Kil-
lenda, the principal of those churches, and to which all the
rest were subject.£ The feast of St. Endeus, who died in the
beginning of the sixth century, is observed on the 21st of

£ Usher, p. 451. Act. SS. ~.714. Ware. Writers, p. 305.

vicinity. Our readers will have remarked that the first six churches named in Dr.
Keely’s list all stood near each other, and to the north of the present village of
Killeany. Out of the six, four have almost entirely disappeared, namely, Ki//-
Enda, called also Tempull-mor-Enda, or the great church of Enda; 7empull-mac-
Longa, Tempull-mic-Canonn, and the church of St. Mary. They were demolished
by the unholy hands of the invaders, for the sake of the materials which they sup-
plied, to build the castle of Arkin.

“«The church known as Teglach Enda still exists on the shore ; it is in good
preservation, and is a fine specimen of the single church without chancel It is
24 feet in length and 14 in breadth. All the walls now standing are by no
means of an equal antiquity. The eastern gable and part of the northern
side wall are the only parts belonging to St. Enda’s time, the remainder of the
building being the work of a later period. The eastern gable is built of large
stones like those at Tempull-Mac-Duagh, cemented with excellent mortar, one of
the stones extending almost the entire breadth of the gable. The window
in the eastern gable is 1 foot 17 inches high and 8 broad on the outside, and
on the inside 2 feet 3 inches high, and 1 foot 2 inches at the top, widening,
however, at the bottom to 1 foot 8 inches. The doorway is placed in the
northern wall, and is about 2 feet broad, and 5 high. It is in the modern
pointed style, and cannot be more than five hundred years old. There is a narrow
window in this northern wall of about 3 feet in height, of the same age as the
doorway. Beneath this window, on the outside of the edifice, we found inserted
in the wall a beautiful sepulchral slab inscribed, ‘or do Scandlain,’ a prayer for
Scanlan, which, however, was clearly not i sitw, since the lines ran not parallel
but at right angles with the ground. It was, probably, one of the many sepulchral
slabs belonging to the cemetery which surrounds the church, and was employed
by the restorers of the building. We do not know who this Scanlan was, but in
the list of saints of the family to which St. Enda belonged, we find mention made
of a Scanlan who was father of Flann Febhla, Archbishop of Armagh. Around
the church spreads the cemetery, now almost completely covered up by the sands,
in which the body of St. Enda, and those of one hundred and fifty other saints, are
interred. Between this cemetery and the castle of Arkin we found some remains
of masonry buried in the sands, which had left uncovered what seemed to be the

lintel of the doorway of one of the primitive buildings. Probably it was portion
of one of the four churches mentioned by Dr. Keely, and which had been de-
stroyed.

“A litde beyond this point, in the street of the village of Killeany, we entered a
narrow road, leading up the hill at the foot of which this ruined castle still frowns
on the sea, and soon reached a small well sunk deep in the ground, known to the
natives as the Friar’s well. It was the well that served the fathers of a Franciscan
Monastery, which was built, Ware says, in the year 1485, probably by the
O’Briens, on the slope of the hill just under the round tower of St. Enda, This
establishment also was demolished by the barbarians for the sake of its building
materials. It was easy for us, however, to trace its site by the lines formed by the
foundations of the walls ; and the base of a large stone cross, with portion of the
cross itself, was found lying in the middle of a field on which the building once
stood. The walls of loose stone on the road side were here festooned by thick
and verdant shoots of the hop plant, which spread in great luxuriance around.
This shrub is not found elsewhere on the island. It, and the miined cross, and a
few shapeless walls, are all that survive to tell where once stood garden and
cloister of the Franciscan Monastery.

“A little higher up, on the hill side, we came to St. Enda’s well and altar; the
atter surmounted by a rude cross, and betraying by its clumsiness the work of a

