--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-218.png ---
192 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

them was dedicated to the Virgin Mary, and both were sub-
ordinate to the church of Killenda.*

© Usher, p. 451, and Act. SS. p. 714.

the waves breaking softly on the shore, rise in unison to the heavens.’ It must
have been one of these men, whose island home had shut out all sights of earth,
save that of the altar, of the sea, and of the wild birds disporting along the sunny
shore, who, in an ancient lrish treatise on the mass vestments, warns the priest
that his ‘heart should be chaste and shining, and his mind like the foam of the
wave, or the chalk on the gable of an oratory, or like the colour of the swan
in sunshine, that is, without any particle of sin, great or small, resting in his
heart.’

“*At Aran, too, as at Lerins, while men sought after eternal happiness, they
found that earthly happiness pure and without alloy was poured into their hearts.
« Oh ! how joyous was the life of that blessed company of the saints of Aran, where

the nobly-bora Enda and Kevin proved their kingly descent by the regal fulness
of their virtues as well as by the grace and dignity of their manners ; where
Columba could gratify his scholarly passion for fair manuscripts, and Kieran find
fresh treasures of ecclesiastical lore to acquire ; where Brendan could learn all that
man knew of the ocean and its mysteries, and Mochuda evermore delight in the
sacred harmonies that first had won his young heart to the religion of Christ:
where the highest form of oriental asceticism was happily united with the fire of
the active energy of the west. No wonder that Kieran wept to leave the beloved
shore! No wonder that through the farewell wail of the exiled Columba, there
runs such an intensity of almost passionate sorrow, that a thousand years have not
been able to efface it !”"

This note would not be complete without that venerable fragment of our early
church—the sweet poem composed by St. Columbkille as a farewell to Aran. The,
following verses are from a literal translation made for the Ordnance Survey by
O'Donovan :—

“* Farewell from me to Aran:
This it is that anguishes my heart,
That I am not westward at her billows,
Amidst the groups of phe saints of heaven.

“* Farewell from me to Aran;
It is the sad farewell,
And it filled with angels bright,
I without an attendant in my currach.

**O great Modan, son of Merseng,
Prosperity to thee is what I say,
1 being sent on a journey,
Thou remaining in

“ Alas, how far, alas, how far !
I have been sent from Aran the west
To the host of Monachs away,
Depending on the Albanians,

‘« The Son of the living, O, the Son of the living God !
It is who sent me to Iona;
It is He who gave to Enna—great the prosperity !
Aran, the Rome of the pilgrims.

“Aran, thou sun, O Aran, thou sun,
My affection lies in thee westward,
Alike to be under her pure earth,

As under the earth of Paul and Peter.

