--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-188.png ---
162 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

St. Nenn, or Nennid, of the blood royal of Ireland, who
was educated under St. Fiech at Sletty, and afterwards
under St. Finian at Clonard, founded this famous abbey, and
died in the year 523 or 530; his festival is commemorated
here 18th of January. The saint’s bell, ornamented with gold
and silver, is yet preserved here as a precious relic, and is
held in so great veneration amongst the lower class of people,
that it is often judicially tendered them to swear on.

This ancient abbey, in process of time, was converted into
a parish church, with a very large district, being a rectory and
a vicarage in the diocese of Clogher, but the situation being
at length found to be highly inconvenient, it was, in the reign
of Queen Anne, removed to Drumenagh, in the same parish,
on the main land.

Innis-Rocha © In Lough-Earn, about the beginning of the
sixth century, St. Berchan, the son of Declan, son of Fieg,
son of Deodatus, son of Rochad, son of Colla Dachrioch, was
abbot here, where his festival is held 24th of November.'

Kilskirry s™ A monastery of this name was founded A.D.

49. :
7 Kilskirry is now a parish church in the diocese of Clogher!

® Act. SS. pp. IIT, 113, and 114. Vard. Vita Rumd. p.160. Act. SS. p. 713.
® Conry. Liber. visit.

said charge; and they alsoe saie, that in the said parish is a chapple of ease, called
Ffennoare in Macginy, unto which said chapple the viccar of the said parish is to
send a curate to saie divine service ; and that in the said parish also is an other
chapple called Ballihanny, with a quarter of herenagh land of the ould measure,
belonging thereto, whereof M‘Gackequin is the herenagh, and paieth thereout
yerelie to the lord bushopp of Clogher, three shillings and fower ce per
annum ; and that the said parish for soe much thereof as lieth within the said
county of Ffermannagh is bounded as followeth, &c.; and they also found that the
Bishop of Clogher was seized in right of his bishoprick out of the herenagh land
of containing one quarter, whereof OFlanagen was herenagh,
one mark and not else. At present there is in the civil parish of Inishmacsaint, so
far as it extends into the County Fermanagh, 36,9932. 37. 359., and 7,126a. 37.
30/., in the barony of Tirhugh, County Dosesat The chapel of ease called in the
above Inquisition Ffennoare, is now called Finner, it and Ballyhanny being in
the county Donegal portion.

At an Inquisition held at Liffer (Lifford), rath September, 1609, it was found
that the Bishop of Clogher was entitled to divers tithes and duties out of that
part of the parish of Enismisaugh, lying in the barony of Tirhugh, county of Done-
gal, which are all enumerated, as also out of the quarter of land called Ballymac-
gockquin, whereof M‘Gockquin was herenagh.

10 There is an Inishroosk in Upper Lough-Earn, not far from Aughnish and
Friar’s-island.

11 There was another church or monastery of this name in the County Meath,
where St. Sgire, Virgin, was commemorated at the 24th March, according to the
Martyrology of Donegal. and the Felir€ of St. Angus. The Martyrology adds, that
there was another Cill-scire in Fermanagh, which probably was dedicated to the
same saint. The situation of this place corresponds with that of the Disert called
Sirach, alluded to by Colgan asin the upper part of Glendorachy, where St. Foillan
is stated tu have built a church previous to his connexion with Scotland. The
name of Glendorachy seems to be still preserved in that townland of Glen not far

