--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-225.png ---
County of Galway. 199

north-east of Galway, on a small river which falls into Lough-
Corrib.

- About the year 1290, John de Cogan built a monastery at
Clare-Yndowl for Franciscan friars ; he erected it in a very
elegant style, and at a great expense.*

In 1296, Philip de Blund, archdeacon of Tuam, was in-
dicted on the following charges: That the see of Enachdun
having been a long time vacant, the pontificalia thereof were
lodged in this friary, until a bishop should be appointed ; that
the said archdeacon took by violence the chest wherein the
said pontificalia were deposited from the friars, and at the
door of the mother church, did break open the said chest, and
forcibly carried off the episcopal mitre, together with the
pastoral staff, and sundry other things contained in the said
chest.*

On the 7th of March, 1368, Thomas, Lord Athenry, granted
the lands of Cloy-melayn, which lay contiguous to the town
of Clare, for the purposes of purchasing bread, wine, and
wax for the celebrating of mass in this friary.”

The high tower, in the middle of the church, erected on
arches, is a curious piece of architecture; and the chapel
is now the Romish Mass-house.*

Cloghin Cantualaig ; A house for Franciscan friars was
founded here, about the beginning of the 15th century, by
O’Madden. It is probable this friary might have been in the
barony of Longford, which was the original country of the
O’Maddens.4

Clonfert ;° A bishop’s see, in the barony of Longford,
and near the river Shannon.

® War. MS., vol. 34, and Monast. * King, p. 315. »> Lodge, vol. 4, p. 10.
° Pococke's Fournal. * Allemande.

monastery, which is described by the Annalists of the order as second to none of
the Irish houses in the perfection of its architectural details. From the State
Papers of Henry the Eighth’s reign, Ireland, vol. iii., we learn that Lord Leonard
Gray, in his journey through Connaught, ‘‘ visited the friary of Boilean Clare,” and
asa result, the friary, with its church, was rifled, so that “neither chalice. cross,
nor bell, was left in it.” Queen Elizabeth granted the convent, with all its
appurtenances, to Sir Richard de Burgh in 1570. The friars, however, continued.
to live near their cherished convent till the close of the century, when they were
compelled to fly before the soldiers of Bingham, Governor of Connaught, who
turned the church and convent into a garrison. After the accession of James the
First, the Franciscans again occupied a portion of the ruins of the convent, where
they peaceably dispensed the sacraments to the faithful. In 1641, some attempt
was made to restore the sacred buildings, but the repairs were never completed.
The friars, however, clung to the old walls persistently, and. towards the middle of
the last century, Pococke, Protestant Bishop of Meath, states in his Journal, that
their house was used as ‘a Romish Mass House.”

10 St. Brendan, of whom we will speak more at length under Ardfert, in County
Kerry. was from his infancy trained to piety by St. Ita, As he advanced in
years. he was the disciple and companion of St. Jarlath, St. Finnian of Clonard,
and the other great saints, who, in the sixth century, adorned our island by their

