--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-271.png ---
County of Kerry. 243

The steeple, choir, and many other parts of the building
may still be seen.

10 Monaster Ni Oriel; in the barony of Glanerought. Here
are some traces of an ancient building, which, according to
tradition, was a religious house. Smith, in his history of the
country, is the only author who mentions this monastery.*

1 Odorney ; situated near the river Brick, in the barony of.
Clanmaurice. An abbey, under the invocation of the Virgin

» Smith, p. 82.

3° In this barony of Glanarought is situate the parish of Kenmare, in which St.
Finan's well was formerly visited by pilgrims on the 3rd of May and 14th of Septem-
ber. There is also the parish of Kilcaskin, famous for its Zzampull-Fiackna, or
Church of St. Fiachna, of which only a few ruins now remain. In the parish of
Tuosist is the townland of Kilmakilloge, which takes its name from the old church
of St. Mokilloge. The adjoining bay is called after the same saint, and near the
church is one of those primitive cells so characteristic of the early ages of faith in
our country; itis supposed to have been the cell or hermitage of St. Mokilloge,
and is still a favorite resort of pilgrims when performing their penitential
exercises. About a quarter of a mile north-eastward of the old church there is a
small lake called Lough Quinlan, which is a corruption of the Irish name “ Keen-
laun.” Dr. O’Donovan, however, remarks that the ancient name is Lough
Mochionlain, i.e, the Lake of St. Mokilloge. The name Mokilloge, as those
conversant with Irish hagiology will easily understand, is only an endearing form
of the name St. Killian. Several saints of that name are mentioned in our
calendars, but the annual patron festival has been kept here from time immemorial
on the 8th of July, which is popularly styled St. Keenlaun’s day, on which day is
commemorated the martyrdom of the great St. Killian, patron of Wurzburg. It
is traditionally recorded that St. Killian founded a church in the neighbourhood of
Lough Keenlaun, and lived there for some years before he entered on his
missionary labours on the Continent ; and thousands still flock to the banks of the
lake on the 8th of July, to perform special devotions in his honour. This great
saint was of prince! y rank, and was born about the year 610. In his early years
he devoted himself to the practice of virtue in the Monastery of Clonmacnoise,
and subsequently, when raised to the episcopate, he seems to have made Kerry
the field of his spiritual labours. About the year 650 he resigned his episcopal
charge, and set out on pilgrimage to Rome. We afterwards meet with him
visiting his relative St. Fiacre, and sharing with him for a time his holy hermitage
at Meaux. For several years he laboured with such devoted zeal in Artois, and
throughout the whole territory of the Morini, as to merit to be honoured as their
Apostle. With the sanction of the Holy See, he, with some chosen companions,
sought to scatter the Gospel seed in Franconia, and received their the martyrs’
crown on July the 8th, 689. His relics are enshrined at Wurzburg, and that city also
possesses the venerable copy of the Gospels written in Irish characters, which he was
reading at the altar at the time of his martyrdom, and which was besmeared with
his blood. The Cathedral of Wurzburg was erected by another Irish bishop, St.
Burchard, who translated to it the relics of our saint in the year 752.

4 About two and a-half miles from Ardfert are the ruins of the great Abbey of
Odorney, which, from some affinity with the name of the County Kerry, in which it
was situated, was known on the Continent by the name of the Abbey of Kyrie-
eleison. It belonged to the Cistercians, and its abbot voted in the House of Lords,
In the Acts of the Chapters General of the Cistercian Order, published by Martene,
there is a curious entry regarding this abbey, as follows :—“ A.D. 1274. Cum
Abbas de Kyrie Eleison anno praeterito per literas quorundam abbatum ordinis
Nostri accusatus fuerit et denunciatus capitulo generali super quibusdam intolerabi-
libus, propter quae ipsum absolvimus a imine abbatiae ; et ipse hoc anno per
literas quorumdam abbatum, et testimonio fide dignorum innocens repertus fuerit
de praemissis, eumdem abbatem in instanti restituit capitulum generale, et de Mellie

