--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-273.png ---
County of Kerry. 245

same year a grant was made to him of several religious houses,
among which was this abbey, with the appurtenances, to him
and his issue male ; but, in default thereof, they reverted to
the crown.P

The abbot of this house was a Lord of Parliament.4

28th June, 39th Queen Elizabeth, the town of Menecrie,
containing the sixth part of a carve of land, parcel of the pos-
sessions of this abbey, was granted to the Provost and Fellows
of the College of the Holy Trinity, near Dublin. See the
Abbey of Cong, in the County of Mayo.

This abbey is now a shapeless ruin; nothing but old low
walls are to be seen, which resemble those of an ancient church
without a steeple.

2 Rattoo ; called in some old records Rafhtoy, is situated

P Smith, p. 218, « War. Mon.

3 Rattoo, in Irish Rath-tuaidh, t.e., the “ northern fort” (sometimes pronounced
Rathtoy) is called Rathmore, or the great fort, in some ancient records. It is about
five miles from Ballybunion, and retains still the ruins of two churches as well as
a majestic round tower. Thismonument of our early church is here popularly called
Gioltach, which name seems a corruption of c/oicteach, by which the round towers
were generally designated. Tradition records that there was a silver bell in the
top of this tower, which had a remarkably sweet tone, and that it is now at the
bottom of the river Brick. To the east of the tower inthe same field, but at about
one furlong distance, are the ruins of the more modern abbey, whichjwas erected in
the reign of King John, In the same parish, in the townland of Derrycodoire-
Chua, are the ruins of a remotely ancient church, the walls of which are not
unlike those of the cahers on the Aran Islands. It was 50 feet in length, and 22
feet in breadth. The side-walls are 3 feet 9 inches in thickness, and about 11 feet
in height, and built of blocks of sandstone evidently found on the sea shore, but
none like them are to be seen in the immediate vicinity. The cement is very
good, though the external face of the walls looks as if they were in the cyclopean
style.

‘O'Donovan, in the Ordnance Survey Papers, informs us that the Rattoo, in op-
Position to Rattass, was sometimes called by the Irish writers Kath-muighe.tuats-
cirt, iv., “the fort of the northern plain.” This enables us to identify St.
Lughaidh, as one of the early bishops of this see. His feast is on the 6th of October.
The Martyrology of Donegal speaks in a somewhat doubtful manner, and calls him
“Bishop of Cuil-Beaunchair, on the brink of Loch Erne, and of Rath-muighe-
tuaiscirt, in Ciarraighe Luachra; or of Cuil-Beaunchair, in Hy-Failghe, and of
Tuaim-fobhair, in Luighne.” However, the Féliré of St. AEngus removes all doubt
on this head. In the text of the Feliré the saint is commemorated as ‘‘ the gentle
Bishop Lughdhach;” and then the note is added, “ This is Bishop Lughdhach
from Daire-na-Flann, in the Eoghanact of Caisel, viz., Lughdhach, bishop in Cuil
Bendchair, in Uibh-Failghe. The same Bishop Lughdhach is in Cuil-Bendchair
in Lurg, on the brink of Loch Emme ; and he is in Rath-muighe-tuaiscirt, in Ciar-
raighe Luachra, viz., at Daire Mochua on the banks of the Feile.”

Rattass, to which we have just referred, derives its name from Rath-muighe-
deiscert, i. ‘the fort of the southern plain.” In the parish of Rattass there is a
venerable old church; and O’Donovan, in the Ordnance Survey Papers,
expresses his surprise that Smith, inhis //tstory of Kerry, should pass it by without
mentioning its beauty and antiquity. The quoin stones in it are all chiseled.
The east and west gables, and the greater part of the north wall, remain in
good preservation. ¢ doorway, a usual in the Irish churches of great anti-
quity, is in the middle of the west gable, and is now stop up on the inside
with rough masonwork. It is of quadrangle form, and its sides slope in a


