--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-261.png ---
County of Kerry. 233

Ballinaskeligs, or St. Michael’s Mount ;* in the barony of
Iveragh ; here was.an abbey for regular canons of the Order
of St. Augustine, and under the invocation of St. Michael,
which had been removed hither from the island called the
Great Skelig, but at what time is uncertain ; from the large
traces of the ruins, which the sea is continually demolishing,
this ancient abbey appears to have been a very noble and ex-
tensive edifice.

*In the Trinity College, Dublin, MS. (I. I., 3) already referred to, we find
the following short notice of this monastery :—* The Abbey of Ballynascelly,
or Monte Sancti Michaelis, of the Order of St. Augustine, dedicated to St.
Michael the Archangel: it was originally founded on one of the Séil/ock’s rocky
islands that lie westwards, remote in the sea, but afterwards it was translated to
a more commodious place, on the land of Iveragh: neither the time when it was
founded nor the founder is known ; only the Annals of Inisfallen Abbey tell that
Flann Mac Cellach ‘ Abbas Scelichensis,’ died in the year 885.”

In the barony of Iveragh is situated the parish of Valentia, an island known in
Irish as Oslean-dairbre, i.e. “the island of the oak-wood,” and celebrated in
pagan times as the abode of the chief magician, Mogh-Ruth. It was a favorite
resort of Christian piety in later ages. It still retains the ruins of an old church
called Kilmore, a holy well called Tobereendowney (a corruption of the Irish
“ tobar-righan Domnaigh,”) at which the patron was kept on 22nd March ; and
another holy well, Zoder-Finan, dedicated to St. Finan, frequented by pilgrims
on the 17th March,

There is also the parish of Killemlagh, #.¢., “the church of the borders,” which
is washed by the waters of the Atlantic. The old church stands on an elevation
about one-fourth of a mile from the shore, and commands a good view of the
distant Skeligs. The church was dedicated to St Finan—not St. Finian, as
Smith has it. His festival was formerly kept here on the 16th of March, on
which day our saint is named in all the Irish calendars, The bay here is also
called St. Finan’s bay. His holy well, Zosar-Fineain, ison the sea shore, to the
west of the old church, There is another holy well called Zobar-buaigne ; the
townland is also called A/aduonia, in Irish “ Cille-Baidhne,” and sometimes
written “ Cille-Baine,” There are two ancient burial-places called Cil/-oluaig
and Cill-chaombrach.

In the parish of Prior, called in Irish ‘‘ parish of the prior,” are the ruins of an
old abbey and church, which are gradually encroached on by the sea. It is dedi-
cated to St. Michael the Archangel. St. Michael’s well is situate in the south of
the townland of Dungegan, and the patron was kept there on the 29th of
September. In the east of the townland of Kinnard West, in the same parish,
is an old burial-place called Regies, with the ruins of an abbey.

In the parish of Caher, about one-fourth of a mile to the north of Caherciveen,
at the north side of the little bay, is a curious ancient stone church, or cell, built
without any kind of cement, like those of Kilmalkedar, and a few perches from it
is a stone altar, at which stations are performed. The cell is called Ci/-a-bhear-
nain, and sometimes Cill-a-bharnoge. On Church Island, in the same parish, there
is a similar cell, or church, and with it a beehive stone house.

In the parish of Killinaun, #e., Ci/-Lonain,is the old church of St. Lonan,
whose pattern is held on the 3rd of March. Near it, on the side of the hill, is
Tubber-Gobnet, iz, * St. Gobnet’s well.”

‘he parish of Drummod, in the townland of Caherbarnagh, has Zudder
Fionain, i... “the well of St. Finan, of Loch Luigheach, or Lough Lee.” In this
small lake, called Loch Luigheach, at the boundary of this parish, is an island
called Oileau-a-teampull, i.e, ‘‘Church Island,” and on it are the ruins of a
church and some cells, said to have been erected by St. Fionan. There are two
flags exhibiting an ornamented cross indented : one of these is said to mark the
the grave of St. Finan. On the west end of this island, and washed by the
waters of the lake, is one of the ancient stone houses of round form on the out-


