--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-246.png ---
220 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

which was founded for nuns of the order of St. Benedict
about the year 1200, by Cathald O’Conor Crovderg. The
cells of Inchmean and Ardcarn, in the County of Roscommon,
were afterwards annexed to this house."

The Lady Fynola, daughter of Felym O’Conor, was abbess
here, and died in 1301.'

At the suppression, this nunnery was granted to Richard,
Earl of Clanricarde.*| See Aghrim.

Killine Bonaina ; A friary for Franciscans of the third
order was built here in the year 1428, which afterwards be-
came one of the most considerable houses of that order.”

Killoebhain ; A parish church in the diocese of Clonfert ;
it seems, says Colgan, to be the same with that which was
called Domnach-loebhain. We are told that St. Maccectus
of Domnach-loebhain was smith to St. Patrick, and made the
famous relique called Finnfaidheach.*

Kilmacduach ;* In the barony of Kiltarton. St. Colman,
the son of Duach, founded an abbey here about the year 620 ;7
and Maurice, Bishop of this see, who died in 1283, erected, on
the ancient site, a monastery for regular canons of the order
of St. Augustine.

* War. Mon. + Ann. Loughkee, and M‘Geogh. ™* Auditor-General. “~ Wad~
ding in Allemande. * Tr. Th. p. 167 and 188. 7 Act. SS. p. 219 and 247.

*3 Kilmacduagh derives its name from its patron saint, who, to distinguish him
from the many other saints of the name of Colman, was commonly styled MacDuach.
The Martyrology of Donegal marks his festival on the 3rd February. “Colman,
Bishop, #.¢,, Mac Duach, of Cill-mic-Duach, in Connact. He was of the race of
Fiachra, son of Eochaidh Muidhmheadhoin. Great were his virtues and miracles.”
He was patron of the O’Shaughnessys, and for more than a thousand years the
girdle of the saint was handed down as a precious heirloom in the chief family of
that sept. They, however, were accustomed to celebrate his feast on the 27th of
October. St. Colman spent seven years in a wild forest in the district of Burren,
on the borders of Clare and Galway, practising all the austerities of the eremitical
life. The fame of his sanctity attracted the attention of Guaire, King of Connaught,
who offered him a tract of territory for a religious establishment. St. Colman
erected there the church which now bears his name, and which soon rivalled in
the extent of its attendant religious establishments the greatest foundation in
Ireland. The round tower and the seven churches still exist. A little more than
a hundred years ago, Bishop Pococke found a great part of the old cathedral in
good repair: ‘‘ On the south side,” he writes, ‘‘of the cathedral is an ancient altar
in good taste ; under a relief of a bishop is this inscription: ‘Sanctus Colman
patronus totius Dioecesis Duacencis.’ In the middle is a crucifix, and a person
on each side, with Ave Maria, and some devotions around it. To the west of
the cathedral, in the church-yard, is a small cell, where, they say, the patron saint
was buried, and that the body was aftzrwards carried to Aghrim. Between this
and the church is MacDuagh’s chapel, in which is standing a large tree, of which
they take pieces by way of relics; and to the south of this is a raised work of
stone, which they call the bishop's bed.”— Corton “ Fasti,” 199. In an adjoining
lake called Lough Deehan, the waters having sunk very low in 1785, a wooden house
was discovered in the mud at the bottom: it was formed of oak timber of great
thickness, the sides and roof of which were formed of wattlework of the same
materials, It was fully a thousand years old, and may have belonged to one of the
early religious establishments of St. Colman,

