--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-195.png ---
County of Fermanagh. 169

Ress Orry ;* On the west side of Lough-Earn, near
Enniskillen. St. Fanchea, or Fuinchea, founded a nunnery

6 The entry in the Calendar of Donegal is:—‘‘ Funiche Garbh, Virgin, of Ros-
airthir [the eastern promontory], on Loch Eirne, in Ulster, of the race of Eoghan,
son of Niall.”

St. Fanchea, whose name is also written Fuinche and Funchea, was daughter of
Conall Derg, King of Oriel, in Ulster. Her mother was Briga, surnamed Aib-
finnia, é.z., the Fair, daughter of Ainmire, of the Dalaradian race. Four other saints
sprung from the same holy family—St. Enda, the patron of Arann, and Saints
Lochina, Carecha, and Darenia. This last named saint was espoused to Aengus,
son of Natfraich, King of Munster, and is supposed to have been the mother of
St. Colman, Bishop and Abbot of Derrymore. St. Fanchea grew up in the
practice of virtue, and we find her numbered among the holy virgins who received
the veil at the hands of our Apostle St. Patrick. It was to her prayers and holy
influence that St. Enda owed his conversion ; and to prove his gratitude, he
wished to labour with his own hands in fencing in her monastery, and erecting a
rath or earthen wall, and other necessary works for its protection. Two-thirds of
this enclosure yet remain, and at the western side the earthen wall is 18 feet in
thickness. A neighbouring church, that of St. Lasser, also of the sixth century,
is surrounded by a very marked earthen wall, which likewise measures about
18 feet in thickness. The relics of St. Fanchea were deposited at Killaine,
now Killany, in the County of Louth, which was a branch house of her monastery
and which is supposed by Colgan to have derived its name from our saint, and to
have been originally known as Kill-Fainche. The saint’s death must be referred
to adate at least thirty years later than that marked by Archdall.

In the Fermanagh Survey of 1st James 1., it is returned amongst the spiritual lands
of the barony of Clynawley, as ‘‘The parish church of Lassassaire, having one
tath of land, and possessed by Munterclaryk as corbes, the lands being hospital or
neg land.” This munter, or family, was probably the O’Clearys, anglicized
Clerk.

The Inquisition of 18th September, 1609, finds, that in the barony of Clonawley
is the parish of Rosseriere; the parsonage and vicarage are impropriate to the late
dissolved abbey of Lisgoole ; and that the one-fourth part of the tithes (except the
tithes of Ballinebort) are paid to the Bushop of Clogher, and the other three parts
belong to the late dissolved abbey of Lisgoole ; and that the tithes of Ballinebort,
before excepted, are paid as followeth, viz. :—two fourth-parts thereof to the parson
of Inishkine, another fourth part belongeth to the vicarage of Rosseriere, and the
moiety of the other fourth belongeth to the Bishop of Clogher. and the other moiety
to the late abbey of Lisgoole ; and they also say, that the said parish of Rossericre
is bounded as followeth, viz. :—on the west, upon the half tate of Moyglass, called
Lieugh ; on the east, upon Loughglassan; on the south, by the river of Srougho-
dromconrie; and upon Loughearne, on the north. The same Inquisition found
that the Bishop of Clogher was entitled out of the herenagh land, containing two
quarters (whereof the chief herenagh had two acres free), to two marks perannum,
with like refections as out of Maghericoolmanny, which were four nights’ refections
in the bishop’s two visitations, and not else, viz.: two nights’ in May visitation,
and two nights’ at Allhallowtide visitation, and for want of flesh and wine or
aquavite, four shillings ; and also at every Hallowtide, half a beofe, or three
shillings and fourpence, and thirty sroghans of oate breade, or five shillings in lieu
thereof. And it was also found that there were three herenaghs of the said land,
namely, Slut Laughlin MacGuire, Munterluynn, and Munter Connellie.

The following are extracts from the Four Masters :—

A.D. 1084. The monastery of Fuinche. f¢., Ross-airthir, was founded. This
was probably a reconstruction of the old monastery.

A.D. 1365. Paidin O’Congaile, Parson and Erenagh of Ross-airthir, died.
O’Donovan, in his notes, writes that the name Paidin O’Conghaile in modern
times would be anglicized Paddy Conneely, and that it is to be distinguished
from O’Congalaig, pronounced O'Connalaig, and now always anglicized Connolly.
without the prefix é The Munter Conyly were also corbes of the parish of Bally
Congaile, according to the Fermanagh Survey, but in the Inquisition of 18th Sep-

