--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-210.png ---
184 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

March. He was succeeded by St. Benedict, brother to St.
Kieran of Saiger.*
St. Cronan was abbot, but we cannot assign any date to
him:
6 Calendar. * Act. SS. p. 472. ‘Td. p. 564.

modem hand. St. Enda’s well, and indeed all the other wells we saw in the
island, are carefully protected by the Araners; the scarcity of water rendering the

session of a well almost as precious to tnem as it was to the Eastern shepherds

the days of Kebecca. At a short distance to the left of the well, stands the
remnant of the round tower of St. Enda. Once its height was worthy of the
cluster of sacred temple» which stood within the circle traversed by the shadow it
projected in the changing hours ; but now it is little more than 13 feet high.
An aged man who joined our group, told us that in St. Enda’s time the Mass was
not commenced in any of the churches of the island until the bell from St. Enda’s
tower announced that St. Enda himself had taken his place at the altar in his own
church. There have been many theories propounded concerning the uses of the
round towers less satisfactory than this of the simple Araner. The contrast
between the masonry of the round tower and that of the pagan forts is very
remarkable. The round tower was built of chiselled stones, bound together with
cement ; the pagan fortress of stones not dressed by the hand, and put ‘ther
without mortar. No one who has had an opportunity of comparing both, can
ae persuaded that they are the work oF the same period or of the same

uilders.

“Ascending the hill where it rises to the south-west behind the tower, we reached
the exquisitely beautiful duirteack known as Tempull Benain, or temple of St.
Benignus, pupil of St. Patrick, and Archbishop of Armagh, which crowned the
highest point of the hill above us, and stood out with its sharp lines clearly defined
against the sky. This church is erroneously called Temple Mionnain. It lies
north and south, a peculiarity which distinguishes it from the other churches of
these primitive ages, which, as a rule, lie east and west. A solitary arched
window in the eastern wall, where the altar stood, gave admittance to the light
through an opening a little more than a foot high and a foot broad. The doorway
is in the nort gu le, and commands an enchanting prospect over Casla Bay. It
is 6 feet 3 inches in height, and 1 foot 3 inches broad at top, while, like the
cyclopean doors, it widens at bottom to a width of 2 feet. The original height of
the side walls was 7 feet 4 inches ; the northern gable rose to the height of 17 feet,
but is now only 1§ feet high. In the western wall there is one large stone, in
size 4 feet by 4, and 11 inches in thickness. Tempull Benain measures on the
outside only 1§ feet t inch in length, and rt feet 3 inches in breadth. The
roof has totally disappeared, but was evidently a stone roof like that on the
building known as St. Kevin’s house, at Glendalough. Dr. O’Donovan, who, in
company with Dr. Petrie, examined all the churches in Aran, and to whose
accuracy we owe those details of measurement, unhesitatingly declares this church
of St. Benain to be an erection coeval with St. Benignus himself. It is well
known that this saint has always been the object of great devotion in the west, on
account of his apostolic labours in that portion of Ireland.

“And here, before leaving this part of our subject, we wish to quote Dr. Petrie’s
eloquent remarks on the primitive churches of our land, and what are ally
applicable to those on Aran, ‘That they have little in them,’ says the learned
man, ‘to interest the mind or attract regard as works of art, it would be childish
to deny ; yet, in their symmetrical simplicity—their dimly-lighted nave, entered
by its central-west doorway, and terminated on the other side by its chancel arch,
affonting to the devout worshipper an unimpeded view of that brighter sanctuary
in which were celebrated the divine mystenes which afforded him consolation in
this world and hope in the next—in the total absence of everything which could
distract his attention—there is an expression of fitness to their purpose too often
wanting in modern temples of the highest pretensions; as the artless strains s1
to the Creator, which, we may believe, were daily hymned in these unad
temples, were calculated, from their very simplicity and artlessness, to awaken

