--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-251.png ---
County of Galway. 225

here,™ which, on the suppression of monasteries, was granted
to Sir Francis Sammes."

Templegaile, or Teach Saxon ; Situated two miles west of
Athenry.

We are told that the ancient church of Tigh Sasson was
burned by lightning in the year 1177.°

A friary of small extent was founded here in the reign of
King Henry VII. by one of the family of Burgh,? for Fran-
ciscans of the third order ; which friary and its appurtenances,
together with the Abbey of Mayo, was afterwards granted to
the burgesses and commonalty of Athenry.4

Temple Moyle; Another friary was erected here sometime
after the year 1441, for friars of the third Order of St. Francis,"
which was granted to Edmund Barret.*

Tombeola ; Situated at the head of Roundstowne Bay, in
the barony of Ballynahinch.

A monastery for Dominican Friars was founded here about
the year 1427, by the O’Flahertys, dynasts of Eir Connaught,
in which elevated station they continued till the arrival of
Oliver Cromwell.

In the beginning of Queen Elizabeth’s reign this building
was wholly demolished, and even the stones, those of the
church walls not excepted, were made use of to build a castle
in the neighbourhood. The few ruinous remains are scarcely
visible, and very imperfectly mark the traces of this ancient
village.t

Tuam ;%* In the barony of Dunmore, is the seat of an arch-

™ War. Mon. » Harris's Tab. ° Annal. Lagenia. ® War. Mon. and Harris’s
Tab. % Aud. General. * War. Mon. * Harris's Tab. * Burke, p.308. ° Called
anciently Tuaim da Valain,

%8 The festival of St. Jarlathe, now kept on the 6th of June, is marked in our
calendars on the 26th of December, on which day he is commemorated in the
Martyrology of Donegal. He was born in the $th century, and is said to have
received in his childhood the blessing of St. Benignus, of Armagh. He established
a religious house at Cluainfos, #.¢., ‘‘the valley of retreat,” about a mile from the

resent town of Tuam, and subsequently erected the church and monastery of

‘uam. St. Jarlathe was remarkable for his austerities, and in the poem of St.
Cuimin of Connor, on the characteristic virtues of the Irish saints, he is styled
“one who practised not penury,” and who made three hundred genuflections each
day, and the same each night. He died about the year 540. His relics were
preserved in a rich shrine in a separate church, thence called Skreen, in the town
of Tuam. Dr. John Lynch, writing in 1672, describes a portion of the old walls of
this Skreen as still standing, though the place was then used as a barn. He adds
that in the beginning of the century, while some men were engaged in threshing
corn, they remarked something shining in the floor ; removing the clay, they found.
a rich ornamental case enclosing the relics of St. Jarlathe—“ Cupream thecam
quinquangularem S. Hierathii Reliquias includentem :” this was brought to Dr.
Daniel, the Protestant Archbishop, who privately handed it over to the Roman
Catholic Vicar-General, Francis Kerevan, hy whom it was consigned to a good
Catholic family for safe keeping. Colgan speaks of these relics as still preserved

VOL. Il. Q

