--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-171.png ---
County of Fermanagh. 147

Clinish = An island in Lough-Earn, three miles south of
Enniskillen. St. Synell, son of Manacus, or Maynacur, was
abbot of Cluain Inis about the middle of the sixth century ;
his feast is held 11th of October. St. Fintan dwelt with this
saint upwards of eighteen years.°

Cleenishe is now a parish church in the diocese of Clogher.4

° Usher, p. 485, and Calendar.  Bps. Visitation Book.

ariaght aforesaid ; the half ballibetagh of Ballihanulty, the four quarters and a half
of Derrimoielan ; one quarter of Caricke, the half quarter of Enishmore; and that
over and besides the said lands, there were-five quarters called Brade, in the count:
of Tyrone, theretofore parcel of the said parish ; and that in said parish was both
a parson and vicar colative, and the whole tithes of the said parish (except the
tithes of Farrenarioght and Ballivarrall) were paid in kind. and the parish church
repaired in such manner as the tithes were paid, and the church repaired in the
parish of Maghericoolemanny ; and that the said parson and vicar paid yearly to
the Bishop of Clogher, viz.: the parson 8s., and the vicar 4s.; and it was also
found that in said parish one chapel called Magherinecrosse, in Farrenerioght, with
two small tates of land, the duoghasa whereof paid thereout yearly unto the said
bishop 35. 4d. per annum, and that there was a vicar endowed with care of souls ;
and that one-fourth part of the tithes of Ballivarroll and Farrenarioght were paid
to the said vicar, another fourth to the Bishop of Clogher, and the other two fourths
to the parson of Derrimoyllan, and that the bishop’s proxies out of said chapel was
2s. per annum, ;

The chapelry of Magherinecrosse, whereof the Clan McRoony were corbes, has
been long since erected into a civil parish, lying in the baronies of Lurg and Tir-
kennedy, county Fermanagh, and East Omagh, county Tyrone.

The Duoghasa mentioned in the foregoing Inquisition would seem to have been
a sub-collector of tribute under the corbe, derived from dubhchios, signifying tribute,
or black rent, as explained in O’ Reilly's Dictionary.

In 1704 the Rev. Philip McGwyre, residing at Boyoghill, was parish priest of
pag Ales and Derrybrosk, being then fifty-six years old, and had received orders
in November, 1671, in Dublin, from Dr. Oliver Plunket, Primate of Ireland.

® Clinish, now Cleenish, a corruption of the original name Claen-inis, or Cleen-
inish, which, as Joyce informs us, means ‘‘the slopingisland.” The Martyrology
of Donegal has at 12th November—“ Sinell, son of Mianach (or Moenach), of
Claoin-inis, in Loch Eirne.” St. Sinell was a disciple of St. Finnian of Clonard,
and founded the Monastery of Claein-inis about the year 550. It was here that
the great missionary, St. Columbanus, first applied himself to sacred studies ; and
before he quitted this monastery he composed his Commentary on the Psalms,
which affords abundant proof that the Greek and Hebrew languages were pro-
foundly studied by the disciples of St. Sinell. Another illustrious ornament of
Cleenish was St. Fintan Munnu, who, towards the close of the 6th century, passed
sixteen years in the paths of sanctity on this island.

The survey of County Fermanagh (Ulst. Ing. xxxiv.) has, under the barony
of Clynawley, among the spiritual lands :—

“The parish church of Cloaninis hath five quarters of land : it is by
Sleught Laughlin Maguire as corbes. The chappell of Temple Anaaiffrin hath two
tates of land: it is possessed by Clangillilaisn as corbes; all these lands are like-
wise small measure.”

In the margin is printed :—‘‘We find these said lands belonging to these
churches to be hospital or termon land, and that the king’s majesty is justly entitled
thereunto by Act of Parliament within this realm, in the 33rd thal of King Henry
VIIL, of famous memory, and that the same are now actually and ly in his
majesty’s rightful possession.”

‘emple Anaaiffrin, now Templenaffrin, signifying ‘‘the tempie or church of the
pees is now the name of a townland containing 1592. 2r. 369. in the parish of
lenish.

By an Inquisition taken at Enniskillen 18th September, 1609, it was found “ that

