--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-204.png ---
178 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

lands of Corvally, Clonerurrin, Caldragh, and Cillkagh, with
their appurtenances ; together with the moiety of all the tithes,
alterages, &c., accruing out of the several towns and lands of
Moylagh, Trasnagh, Annaghmore, Coolowe, Mullaghmore,
Annaghleyne, Corgarroue, Boevoynen, Cloonoran, Cloone-
halgy, Tonelegy, Ballyroioau, Conbally, Coonecurry, Caldraght,
and Cillkagh aforesaid; all the tithes out of -Coolereogh,
Togher, and the grange respectively ; the moiety of all the
tithes and of all oblations, &c., yearly, out of the town and
lands of Coolewortagh and Drisughan ; the fourth part of the
tithes, &c., out of Tacenagh; the fourth part of all the tithes
&c., out of Corbally ; the fourth part of all the tithes of Cor-
bally, Curanbegg ; the fourth part of all the tithes of Grange,
with the lands of Agherein ; the fourth part and the half of a
fourth part of all the tithes in Ardneshadda, with all the alte-
rages, &c., out of the said lands of Grange, Curanbegg,
Aghenan, and Arneshadda; all which lands, &c., aforesaid,
situated in the County of Galway, are worth in the whole,
yearly, £25 10s. Irish money, besides reprises.”

Aghrim ;> In the barony of Kilconnell, and about four
miles west of Ballinasloe and the river Suck.

At Aghrim O’Many, or Eachraim, was a priory of canons
regular of St. Augustin, under the invocation of St. Catherine ;
some say it was founded in the 13th century by Theobald, the
first Butler of Ireland ; but we cannot find any authenticated
account of this abbey.*

On the surrender of this priory, the prior was seized of a
messuage, or toft, in the town of Athlone, County of West-
meath, value 6d.; twelve gardens beyond the east part of
Athlone, value 3s. ; two parcels of land called Aghavallebeg
and Aghavallemore, near O’Brien’s land, containing an acre

-and a half in the town and lands of Athlone, value 6¢.; a
meadow extending from the said gardens to the river Shannon,
containing seven acres, value 2s. 4d.; a parcel of pasture
ground, near the meadow, called Stradmakan, containing eight
acres, value 2s.; and an eel weir on the said river.”

When the monastery was suppressed, it was granted,
together with those of Clonthuskert, St. John the Baptist, in
Tuam, Kilcreunata, Rosserelly, Loughrea, Kilbought, and
Anagdowne, to Richard, Earl of Clanricarde, and his heirs, in
capite, at the yearly rent of £68 gs. 6d.*

Ahaskeragh ; Inthe barony of Kilconnell, and situated near
the river Suck.

v Lib. Ing. in Bibl. Honoratis. W. Conyngham. = War. Mon. » King,
p. 236. * Audit. General.

3 At this place was fought the decisive battle so fatal to the cause of James the
‘Second, on the 12th of July (old style), 1691,

