--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-176.png ---
152 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

the door is 9 feet from the ground ; the inside of the build-
ing is nearly as smooth as the barrel of a gun, and on the
outside, at the base, a circle of stone projects § inches.
The church, which is the most easterly building, was large
and beautiful, with a nuble, carved window over the high-
altar; next to this window, to the right, about 10 feet from
the ground, is the following inscription, the letters and points
of which are raised :

“Matheus O’Dubagan hoc opus fecit Bartholomeo
O’Flannagan priori de Daminis, A.D. 1449.”

Round this inscription is a frame, somewhat raised, with
another inscription on it, which is now illegible.

he had said Mass the Pope offered him these three things as gifts, but Molaise
consented only to accept the Soiscel Bec, or small Mass Book, which was after-
wards enshrined in a rich case, and was held in the highest veneration throughout
Ireland, asthe Soscel Bec of St. Molaise. Other gifts were also given to him by
the Pope, and especially some holy retics, as he had desired, viz., of SS. Peter and
Paul, of SS. Lawrence, and Clement, and Stephen, of the garment of the Blessed
Virgin Mary, of St. Martin, and other relics. With these sacred treasures St.
Molaise hastened back to Erin ; a portion of them he bestowed on his friend, St.
Aidan, of Ferns; the rest were deposited in the Relic Sic, or small cemetery,
to which, on this account, great privileges were attached.

Of the other facts connected with St. Molaisc’s life, suffice it to mention that the
settlement of the dispute between Dermid McCerbhaill and St. Kuadhan, of
Lothra, was referred to him, and he found fault with the latter for the cursing of
Tara; he, too, it was that, after the battle of Cuildremne, advised St. Columba “to
serve God on a foreign soil,” adding the prophetic assurance that ‘‘he would
there lead many souls to God.” The T.C.D. extracts from the old Register
of the See of Clogher, also inform us that St. Molaise, on his return from Rome,
exercised, by special delegation from the Pope, a general jurisdiction over
the whole Insh Church, “ non solum Ergalliae sed totius Hiberniae principatum
habens tamquam sedis Apostolicae legatus.”

Among the memorials of St. Molaise that have come down to us is the shrine
known as the Soisce! Molaise, which is now preserved in the Museum of the Royal
Irish Academy, and has been admirably illustrated by Miss Stokes for the Society
of Antiquaries in London. See Archacologia, vol. xliii, 1871.“ This venerable
work of early Irish Art,” writes Miss Stokes, “is a small box, or cumdach, of
yellow mixed metal, such as that made to hold the Gospel of St. Moling, or the
Book of Dimma,in T.C.D., Dublin. The date of this reliquary, if so it may
be called, can hardly be of a period later than the close of the roth century. The
inscription which it bears, ‘A prayer for Cennfailad, the comharb of Molaise, by
whom this case was made, and for Gillabaithin, the artificer, who made these
ornaments,’ proves that it was executed for the use of Cennfailad, who died early
in the 11th century, as we are told in the Annals of the Four Masters, A.D. 1025,
*Cennfaeladh, son of Flacthbheartach, successor of Molaise of Daimhinis,
died,’ . . . . On one side of the case is seen a robed ecclesiastical figure holding
an object, believed by Dr. Petrie to be a pastoral staff of a very ancient form.
Details are revealed, however, by the magnified photograph, which would rather
lead us to believe it to be the aspersory in use at the present day in the service of
the Roman Catholic Church. A book is held in the other hand. The figure was
probably intended to represent St. Molaise himself. The chasuble worn by this
ecclesiastic was evidently embroidered. The design upon it would appear to have
been palm-leaves.”

As regards the island, its name DaimAinss, is interpreted in the old records
to mean ‘‘island of oxen.’ Thus, in the ancient Latin Lives of St. Aidan ;

