--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-258.png ---
230 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland,

monastery here for conventual Franciscans, and, probably, on
the site of the ancient abbey. The date of the foundation is
inscribed over the great gate; and the founder was interred
here in 1280,? where we find his anniversary so long solem-
nized on the last day of March.4

1303. Maurice, theson of the founder, was this year interred

here.
1309. William de Bristol was prior, when he brought before

? War. Mon. Lodge, vol, 2,p.102.  % King, ~.354. * Lodge supra.

dedicated to God under his invocation. In Scotland, as we learn from the Mar-
tyrology of Aberdeen (see Kalendars of Scottish Saints, by Dr. Forbes, 1872, page
3286), t. Brendan ruled as patron “the royal Island of Bute” (regalem insulam
de Buta): indeed, as Fordun informs us, it was from a cell erected by St. Brendan,
which, in the old Gaelic, was called Bothe, that the whole island of Bute derived
its name (nostro indiomate BoTHE.—Fordun, lib. i., cap. 29). _Eassie, in Forfar-
shire, is also dedicated to St. Brendan, and many churches in Mull, St. Kilda, and
other parts of Scotland, still preserve his name.

For the details of the life of this great saint, we must refer the reader to the
original documents published by Dr. Moran in the Acta Sancti Brendani, already
referred to, and to a series of articles, which, in 1871 and 1872, appeared in the
Irish Ecclesiastical Record, under the heading of “ Notes on the Life of St.
Brendan.”

The cathedral, which was dedicated to St. Brendan, occupied an eminence on
the north side of the modern town. The following description of the ruins of this
cathedral and of some other monuments which once adorned this neighbourhood,
was written by Samuel Lewis, in 1837: —“‘ The remains (of the cathedral) consist
of the walls of the nave and choir, which are perfect : the east-window has three
lofty lancet-shaped compartments, ornamented internally with light and elegant
clustered pilaster columns ; on each side is a niche, in one of which stands the
figure of a bishop, rudely sculptured, but in excellent preservation, lately found in
sinking a vault, and called and venerated as the effigy of St. Brendan ; near it in
the choir is another of much superior workmanship. On the south side, near the
altar, are nine windows ornamented with pilaster columns, terminating in a trefoil
arch ; at the west end, on the north side, are two square windows, opposite which
are three bold arches resting on square pillars, which led from the cathedral pro-
bably into a chapel, and there were also two other entrances into this part of the
building, the principal at the north-west comer. Four rude Norman arches still
remain, of which the centre is the largest, and was the doorway. A doorway at
the north-west led into a later addition, part of which only remains, and in 1668
was purchased for her tomb by the Dowager Countess of Kerry, and has since been
the family vault of the Crosbies. To the west of the cathedral are two detached
buildings, one having the Norman and the other the pointed arch. An ancient
round tower, which formerly stood near the cathedral, fell about sixty years since.
Within half-a-mile to the east, are the cruciform ruins of the Franciscan Abbey,
consisting ofthe nave and choir, with a lofty tower on the west, a chapel on the
south, and the refectory on the north, adjoining which are two sides of the clois-
ters, the whole principally in the pointed style. The great east window has five
divisions, and is of bold design. on the south side the choir was lighted by nine
windows, under which are five arches in the wall, differing in style and elevation,
and probably intended as monumental recesses for abbots: in the second is an
altar-tomb of the last Earl and Countess of Glandore. The south chapel, of which
the great window is perfect and its details handsome, was connected with the
nave by three noble pointed arches resting on massive, but peculiarly elegant,
Circular columns. A stone in the buttress of the arch nearest the tower, bears a
rude inscription, which, from the difficulty of deciphering it, has given rise to
various opinions, but on lately removing the moss and dirt, proves to be in Latin,
and purports that Donald Fitz Bohen, who sleeps here, caused this work (probably

