--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-260.png ---
232 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

the friars with any necessaries, either through charity or other-
wise. The bishop and his ‘chapter were hereupon arrested,
their goods and chattels distrained, and the money arising
from the same was ordered to be paid into the hands of the
Lord Justice on the next succeeding day after the feast of
St. Peter ad Vincula.*

Several of the Lords of Kerry, and many of their respective
families, were interred here, among which we find the follow-
ing :—Nicholas, who died in the year 1324 ; Maurice, in 1339;*
Defideria, daughter of Gerald FitzMaurice, was a liberal bene-
factress to this house, and died on the feast of St. John the
Evangelist, A.D. 1345 ;" John died in the year 1348, Maurice
in 1398, Patrick in 1410, Thomas in 1469, Edmund in 1498,
and another Edmund, who took on him the habit of the Order,
and died in the year 1543.”

This priory was in high estimation on account of numerous
miracles which were said to have been wrought there."”

The ruins of this noble structure stand a little to the east
of the town ; the walls of the steeple, the choir, with some of
the cloisters, the dormitory, and the chapel for morning prayer,
remain entire.* In the church is a fine figure of St. Brendon,
in alto relief ; adjoining was a round tower 120 feet in height,
and esteemed the finest in Ireland; but being neglected, it
unfortunately fell to the ground in the year 1771.7

* King, p. 314. * Lodge, vol. 2, p. 104, Gc. ° King, p. 314. ~ Lodge
supra. ~™ Allemande * Smith, pp. 204 and 205. O'Halloran Introd. p. 85,
and History, vol. 2, p. 94.

Kerry :—“ The great name,” it says, “ which the County of Kerry and Desmond for-
merly had for learning and other branches of education, as harp-playing, &c., as
also for hospitality and generosity, if particularly described, would make a good
part of a volume. As to the harp-playing, said county could well brag of having
the chiefest master of that instrument in the kingdom in his time, Mr. Nicholas
Pierce, not only for his singular capacity of composing, but also by completing
said instrument with more wires than ever before his time were used. The County
of Kerry and Desmond gentlemen were great proficients in the copious Irish language,
not only their antiquaries, who had their estates, allowances, and several privileges
for being well versed in the reading, writing, and understanding thereof with all
its requisite abbreviations and occult manner of writings, and characters before
letters were invented : said characters were called Ogham Craoive, Ogham Cuill,
and Ogham Consini. They were not strangers to the art of poetry, and in the
nicest and most difficult branches thereof, as the poem called ‘ Dane,’ of which there
were six branches, viz.: Derih, Raniaght-Vegg, Raniaght-Voze, Senah, Drinah,
and Casvam, in which many of them were famous, as also in the heroic verse, and
the composition called ‘‘ Tirir,” of whom was Geoffrey O'Donoghue of the Glinn,
Messrs. Pierce Ferreter, John MacCarthy of Ardcanacta, and Daniel Garav
O'Sullivan, and after their time, the famous Owen Roe O'Sullivan, in what he
undertook.”

We will for the present close our notes regarding this see, with the following
extract from the Royal Visitation, held in 1615. .*‘ In this Diocese of Ardfert, the
number of preachers is three, whereof two are resident. The number of reading
ministers is twenty-one. There is no schoolmaster in this diocese.”

