--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-241.png ---
County of Galway. 215

Guaire, King of Connaught, presented to St. Fechin (who had
quitted the Monastery of Fore, in the County of Westmeath) ;
he founded an abbey thereon, which is now a parish church.
St. Fechin died A.D. 664, and is still venerated here as patron
of the church and island

dnisquin ;* an island in Lough Corrib, on the borders of

the barony of Clare.
» Act. SS. pp. 140 and 14t.

(Westmeath, Fore) have been betrayed by Usher into a like error. The following
account of the erection of the church and monastery here by St. Fechin, is given
in the life of the saint, published by Colgan :—“ On a certain night the holy man,
being in the monastery of Easdara, was by an angel admonished in his sleep, that
it was the divine will that he should go to a certain island of the ocean, which is
called Imaidh, in the western district of Connaught. St. Fechin obeyed the com-
mand of the angel, and hopin to gain many souls to Christ, accompanied by
some disciples, sought the is! just mentioned, where he proposed to dwell and
to build a church. But the inhabitants, at the suggestion of Satan, endeavoured
by all means to exclude him ; wherefore at night they several times cast into the
sea the spades, axes, iron tools, and other instruments which his religious used in
the work of building; but as often as they were thus cast, so often, being cast
back on shore, they were found by the monks in the morning. But when the
man of God and his brethren, notwithstanding this opposition, persisted in con-
tinual labours, watchings, and fasts, and the people, hardened in malice, denied
them all nourishment, at length two of the religious perished, being exhausted
through want. But St. Fechin having poured forth to the Lord a prayer for His
servants, for in complying with His will they had thus perished, merited that they
should be restored to life And when the rumours of the occurrence reached the
ears of King Guaire, the son of Colman, he took care that sufficient food in meat and
drink should be brought to St. Fechin. He added also his royal phial, which
even to this day is called Cruich Fechin. Afterwards, all the islanders, being con-
verted to Christ, were baptized by St. Fechin, and they consigned themselves and
their island to the use and service of the saint and his successors.” Colgan adds
that in his own time St. Fechin was still held in great veneration in the island,
and that an old Irish life of the saint was preserved there. The Four Aasters,
at A.D. 1017, record the death of Fergus, vicar of Iomaith.

18 Insequin, also called Inis-ui-Chuiun, is one of the most remarkable islands
in Lough Corrib, and has sometimes given its name to the whole lake.
O'Flaherty writes in West Connaught, page 22 :—‘‘ On that island of Insequin, St.
Brendan built a chapel and worked divers miracles. In the same island St.
Meldan, whose festival day is on the 7th of February, was abbot of a famous
abbey, about the year 580. He was spiritual Father to the great St. Furs6, of
Peronne, in France, who carried the relics of this saint along with him and en-
shrined them in France.” St. Meldan was descended from Con Cedchathach
Gz., of the hundred battles), whose descendants were called Hui-Cuinn, and from
the saint the island derived its original name, Inis-mac-Hua-Chuinn, i. the
island of the descendant of Con. St. Furs6, who died in 653, was the patron saint
of the O’Flaherties, On the margin of Lough Corrib is Killursa, properly “ Kill-
Fursa,” a parish which honours St. Fursé as its chief patron. It is recorded in the
life of the saint that Fintan, King of Munster, with his wife, Gelgis, daughter of
the King of Connaught, in consequence of troubles in his province, sought a refuge
in Lough Orbsen (now Lough Corrib), and was hospitably entertained by his
relative, St. Brendan, at Rathmath, in Inisuichuinn; and, while residing in the
cella hospitum, had a son who was christened Fursa. He is said to have been a
brother of St. Coona, who gives name to the adjoini parish of Kilcoona.

There is another island in this lake which Should not be passed by without
notice. It is called Inchaguile, and in early times was known by the name ‘‘Inis-
an-ghoil Chraibhthigh,” é.¢., ‘‘ the island of the devout foreigner.” There are two
chapels on this island—one dedicated to St. Patrick, and the other to “ the devout

