--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-232.png ---
206 Ancient Monasterics of Ireland.

Enagh Dune ;®™ On Lough Corrib, in the barony of Clare.

Abbey ; An abbey was founded here in a remote age ; for

so early as the 7th century, we find that St. Meldon was Abbot

or Bishop of Lough-Orbsen, called also Lough-Corrib; his
Sue is observed on the 7th February.”

Nunnery ; St. Brendan of Clonfert built a nunnery here,
under the invocation of the Virgin Mary, for his sister Briga.°

Pope Celestine III. by a Bull dated February the 26th,
A.D. 1195, did confirm this church, together with the town of
Kelgel, to the nuns of the order of Aroacia.P

The steeple of this nunnery was erected in the year 1238.9

On the suppression, it was granted to Richard Earl of
Clanricarde. See Aghrim.

St. Mary's Abbey ; Called also the Abbey of St. Mary de
Portu Patrum, was founded for White Canons of the Order of
Premonstre."

Nicholas was abbot in the year 1311; for we find on record,
that Gilbert, Bishop of Enaghdune, recovered agairist him, in
right of his church, a messuage, twenty acres of arable land,
six of meadow, forty of wood, twenty of moor, and sixty of
pasture, all in Shanthill.*

Franciscan Friary ; This house was considerable, being the
head of a custody to which were subordinate the monasteries
of Connaught and Ulster.‘

College of St. Brendan ; A religious house so named in this
town, in which four priests or vicars were supported. This

™ Tt was called also Annadown, or Enagh-coin, and is a bishopric united to

Clonfert. "Calendar. ° Usher. » War. Mon. %Annal. Annon. * War. Mon.
* King, p.257. * Allemande.

13 Enaghdune, now Annadown, was anciently an Episcopal See, but was finally
united with Tuam in the sixteenth century. An official report forwarded to Rome
in 1555, describes Enaghdune as “a small unfortified city, about four or five miles
distant from Tuam : it has a small cathedral under the invocation of St. Brendan,
with its dean and archdeacon and some canons, who, however, do not reside
there : the cathedral itself is quite abandoned (penitus desolata), and only one
Mass is offered there on festival days ; there is also a tower with a cemetery : one
chalice and vestment. The diocese is very small, and situate among wild and evil
men.”—See Archbishops of Dublin, by Rev. P. F. Moran, Appendix, page 415.
St. Brendan died in the year 577, in the 93rd_year of his age, at the monastery
which he had erected for his sister, St.Briga, at Enaghdune. St. Columba being then
in Iona, “ vidit subito apertum coelum, Angelorumque choros ejus animae obvies
descendere, quorum luminosa et incomparabili charitudine totus eadem hora illus-
tratus mundi orbis fuit.” From Zhe Book of Ballymote we learn that it was Aodha,
the son of Eochy Tirmcharna, King of Connaught, who bestowed Enaghdun on
God and St. Brendan. Ware also tells us that St. Briga’s Monastery was the first
ecclesiastical foundation there, and that it was dedicated to the Blessed Virgin
Mary. For many documents connected with Enaghdune, see West Connaught,
published by I.A.S., page 154. Besides the ruins of the bishop’s house, and the
extensive remains of the abbey church and monastery and convent, the holy
wells of St. Brendan, and St. Cormack, and St. Columbkille’s tree, mark the site
of Enaghdune, the most interesting spot on the eastern shore of Lough Corrib.

