--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-245.png ---
County of Galway. 219

friars was afterwards founded here about the year 1400, by
William O'Kelly, whose death is thus mentioned in the obitu-
ary of this friary :—‘“ 1420, 3 cal. Nov. obitus Will. magni
O’Kelly omnium Hibern. suo tempore nominatissimi ac prin-
cipalis istius conventus fundatoris ; reformatum anno 1460,
per Malachiam filium Will. O’Kelly, qui obiit 13 cal. May,

1464."* :

At the dissolution it was granted to Charles Calthorpe!

The Roman Catholics repaired the friary in 1604."

Kilcoonagh ;® Situated in the barony of Clare, not far
from Enaghdune.

Tipraid, Prince of Hy-fiachria, granted the Abbey of Kill-
chuanna to St. Columb, who placed St. Cuannan over it; he
was maternal brother to St. Carthag, and was afterwards re-
moved to the Abbey of Lismore." This is now a parish church.®

There is another Killcoonagh in the territory of Tirbhriuin ;P4
and we are told that the abbey of Kilconan, founded by
Fergal Muiner Y Induibidan in 1339, was destroyed by fire
the following year, but was rebuilt in 1343.7

Kilcreunata ;* Called also the Nunnery of the Chastewood,

& War. Ms. vol. 34. 1 Harris's Tab. ™ Cox, vol. ii. p.10. ™ Tr. Th. . 494-
Act. SS. p. 252. ° Id. Lib. Visit. ? Act. SS. p. 340. % On the borders of the
Shannon, in the county of Roscommon. * Annals Loughkee.

20 St. Cuana, or Coona, the son of Midam, of the race of Niall of the Nine Hostages,
was born towards the close of the ninth century. His mother, whose name is
variously written Meda and Finneda, was daughter of Fringen, of Corca-duibhne.
St. Cuana was brother of St. Carthage, founder of the great monastery of Rahin,
and also founder of the Monastery and See of Lismore. St. Cuana was himself a
religious of the Monastery of Lismore, under the holy rule of his brother, and sub-
sequently ‘‘ became Abbot of the Monastery of Kilchuanna, in the western district
of Connaught.” He died about the year 650, and is supposed by Ware to be the
author of a chronicle, which is often cited in the Annals PP Ulster under the name
of the Book of Cuan, or Cuanach, but only down to the year 628. Colgan, at the
4th of Feb , has gathered together the fragments of St Cuana’s life, and in-
forms us that the saint assembled around him a number of holy and learned men,
and that Kileoonagh was famed for its schools when the whole of this region from
Clare-Galway to Cong was fertile with learning and piety. Local tradition says,
that St. Fursé was another brother of Cuana. A portion of the round tower
still stands almost in the centre of the enclosure of the little church and burial
ground of St. Cuana. His holy well called Dadbhach Cuana, formerly much fre-
quented by pilgrims, lies in the adjacent townland of Knockreen.

™ Known in the medizval records as the Monastery ‘‘de casta silva.” Patent
Roll of the 18th of Edward the Second, gives us the name of Mora, Abbess de
Casta Silva. By patent of 7th July, 34th year of Henry the Eighth, a Commission
of Inquiry was directed to Christopher, Archbishop of Tuam, Roland, Bishop of
Clonfert, and Patrick Felde, of Paynestown, gent., “to ascertain the possessions
of the late monastery or House of Nuns of Kylcrevet, with power to receive a sur-
render of, and to survey and value the same, and, if necessary, to suppress the
monastery.” By an Inquisition at Parsonstown, 25th March, 1534, Richard, Earl
of Clanrickard and St. Alban’s, was found seized of various lands in Magely,
Killinowen, Ballycore, Fierboy, Monyfadda, alias Tullaghanroe, and Clowne, in
the King’s County, part of the lands of the Rectory of Killcrivagh, in the County
of Galway.

\

