--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-227.png ---
County of Galway. 201

he was intended to succeed the founder in the government of
this abbey.‘

576. St. Brendan, having passed a life of exemplary piety,
died at Enachdune, in his 93rd year, and was interred here.®

590. The feast of St. Brendan is observed on the 16th
of May.s

590. Fintan Corach, abbot of Cluain Ednech, was abbot
and bishop here.

620. Died the abbot St. Seanach Garbh.

The same year died St. Colman, son of Comgall, St.
Seanach’s successor ; it is worthy of remark, that these two
saints had originally been of the order of Black monks, or
Benedictines.«

662. The bishop, St. Cumin, died December the 2nd.)

726. Died the abbot Faghtara M‘Folaghtaine.™

744. Clonfert was consumed by fire.®

748. The town and abbey again suffered from a dreadful
conflagration.®

! Act. SS. p. 439. © Id. pp. 385 and 771. 8 Calendar. ™ Act. SS. p. 385.
1 Td. pp. 371 and 385. * /d. p. 385. Ud. p.747. ™ MGeogh. % Tr. Th.
p- 633. ° Td.
he was found in Cill-Ite in Ui-Conaill-Gabhre. Cumin Fota, #., tall he was ; and
he is honoured with Ernin, son of Findchan, abbot of Lethglend, and Metan Cael
of Aird.” For some particulars of his life, see Liber Hymnorum, part i., p. 84,
seg. Though this saint is honoured on the 12th November, the Annals mark his
death on the 2nd of December.

Frequent reference to Clonfert will be found in the Four Masters. They tell us
of its having been three times plundered, and six times burnt. Situated on the
banks of the Shannon, it was subject to the depredations of the Danes and
Northmen. Inthe year 838, Turgesius appeared with his fleet in Lough Ree, and
plundered Clonfert and Clonmacnoise, with all the other churches in the neighbour-

ood of Lough Derg. In the Fragments of Irish Annals, published by the I. A. S.,
we meet, at A.D. 869, the important entry :—‘‘ In this year came Tomrar the Earl
from Limerick to Cluain-ferta-Brenainn. He was a fierce, rough, cruel man of the
Lochlauns, thinking that he would find a great prey in that church, but he did not
find it as he expected, for intelligence had gone a short time before him, and they
fled expertly before him, some in boats, others into the morasses, and others into
the church. Those whom he caught on the floor and in the churchyard he killed.
Cormac, son of Elatach, chief of Erin for wisdom, the successor of old Ciaran of
Saighir, was in the church, and was saved by the protection of God and of Brendan.
And Tomrar died of madness in this year, Brendan having wrought a miracle
upon him.” In the Annals of Lough Cé, there is also the following interesting
entry at the year 1266 :—‘‘ The bishopric of Luighne (z.¢., Achonry) was assumed
by Thomas O’Miadhacain ; and a bishop-elect came from Rome to Cluain-ferta-
Brenainn, and his episcopal decree was conferred on him at Ath-na-righ (i.¢.,
Athenry) the Sunday before Christmas.” This was John, the Papal Nuncio, of
whom Cotton writes :—* He proved to bea great benefactor to his church, and is
believed to have erected the statues and other carvings which decorate the western
end of the cathedral. After governing the Diocese of Clonfert thirty years, the
Pope promoted him to the Archbishopric of Benevento in Italy.”—Fasti, 163.
Ware also was of opinion that this bishop erected ‘‘the fair frontispiece at the
west end of the church, adorned with a variety of statues of excellent workmanship.”
Dr. O’Donovan however, in his notes to the Four Masters, affirms that this beautiful
ornamented doorway, which is the most perfect specimen extant of the Irish
Romanesque style, is at least two centuries earlier than this bishop's time.

