--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-199.png ---
County of Galway. 173

' King Cathol, the founder, of this abbey, took on him the
Cistercian habit, and dying the 28th of May, 1224, was
interred here ;! where his tomb yet remains.

Marian, who was made Archbishop of Tuam int he year
1235, and died in 1249, appropriated to this abbey the chutch
of Kilfelge.™

1 War. Cenob. and Monast, ™ War. Bps. p. 605.

Abbey. He was very much lamented by the monks, as he was during his life a
great benefactor of this abbey.

1402, There was a monument erected to the memory of Malachy O'Kelly, by
his second wife, Finola, daughter of Turlough O’Conor. _ It bore an Irish inscrip-
tion, of which the following is a translation :—" For Mceleachlainn O'Kelly, King
of Hy-Many, and Finola, daughter of O’Conor, Matthew O’Anli erected this
monument.”

1403. Finola O'Kelly died and was interred with her husband at Knockmoy.
Her death is thus recorded in the Anna/s :—‘‘ Fionnguala, daughter of Torlogh,
son of Hugh, son of Owen O’Conor, the wife of Malachy O'Kelly, lord of Hy-
Maine, died after a well-spent life.”

1484. This year Pope Innocent VIII., by a Bull, established the wardenship
of Galway, and gave certain dues heretofore paid to the Church of St. Nicholas in
that town, by Knockmoy Abbey, towards the support of the warden.

1542. On the 24th of May, Hugh O'Kelly, the last Lord Abbot of Knockmoy,
son of Teige O'Kelly, of Callagh Castle, chief of Hy-Many, and his wife, the
daughter of Donough O’Kelly, surrendered this abbey to Henry VIII., but was
allowed to retain it on undertaking to furnish a ‘‘ battle of Gallowglasses" and
sixty kern in Conaght, twelve horsemen and twenty-four kern out of Conaght.

1585. It appears by the treaty made by Sir John Perrot, the Lord Deputy, on
behalf of Queen Elizabeth, with the lords, chieftains, knights, &c., of Connaught,
that Domnick Lynch was “ Farmor” (farmer) of Knockmoy this year. At this
period, Knockmoy was valued at £209 4s. per annum.

1590. In Lodge's Peerage of Ireland it is stated that Sir Patrick Barnewall, of
Turvey and of Gracedieu, had a lease this year of the lands of Ardnesaddan, Cor-
bally, Uranbegg, Knocknemanagh, Clonkrane, parcel of the possessions of the
Monastery of Knockmoy, for 60 years, at the rent of £31 7s. 9¢. Itis also said
that the Lords Justices received a warrant dated at Windsor Castle 12th
November, 1582, to make him a new lease, without fine, for 60 years, to commence
at the expiration of the former lease.

1604. Rotwithstanding the severe measures put in force against the Catholics, in
obedience to the order of the Lord Deputy, they repaired several abbeys and
monasteries amongst the first of which was Knockmoy.

1611. Valentine Blake, Esq. (to whom the abbey was granted in 1586) was
elected Mayor of Galway, but ha ing refused to take the oath of supremacy, was
deprived of office by Sir Oliver St. John, in the presence of William O’Donnell,
Protestant Archbishop of Tuam.

1622. On the roth of July, Valentine Blake, Esq., of Menlough Castle, was
created a Baronet of Ireland, received a patent to hold a fair at Knockmoy on the
toth of August annually, with the privilege of holding a manor court and the
power of creating five tenures by service of a knight's fee. Knockmoy having been
erected into a manor, Sir Valentine was first lord of the manor.

1630. Sir Valentine Blake, knt. and bart., was again elected Mayor of Galway,
but this time was not disturbed in office.

1652, This year an army of Cromwellian fanatics took possession of the town of
Galway, and among the numerous native Catholic families who suffered exile by
the confiscation which followed were the Blakes. Sir Valentine Blake, Bart.,
M.P., of Menlough Castle, lord of the manor of Knockmoy, and his younger
brother, Sir Walter Blake, knt., were both obli; to leave Menlough Castle in
consequence ofthe great zeal they invariably displayed in behalf of their religion
and country. Sir Valentine had been one of the first, in conjunction with the Rev.
Walter Lynch, the patriotic warden of the town, to close the gates of Galway

