--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-217.png ---
County of Galway. 19t

The Middle, or Second Island; On which are only two
churches; one is called Teampull-ceannannach ; each of

returned to Ireland, carrying with him a rich store of relics of the saints given him
by the Pope, and the penitential canons, which, in his biographer’s time, were still
called the Canons of St. Finnian. He also brought to Ireland a correct copy of
the Hieronymian Gospels, a treasure of such value in the estimation of his eccle-
siastical contemporaries, that the records of the period very frequently refer to St.
Finnian’s Gospels. In 540, he founded the great Monastery of Moville, where
St. Columba spent portion of his youth. After labouring with energy for many
years in Ireland, St. Finnian returned to Italy, where, according to the best
authorities, he was made Bishop of Lucca, in Tuscany, in which church he is
venerated under the name of St. Frigidian, or Fridian. The /talian Annals give
588 as the year of his death; the Annals of Ulster and Tigernach, 589.

‘The Irish Lif of St. Columbkille makes mention of the sojourn of that great
saint on Aran. ¢ traditions still current on the island confirm this statement.
The deep love of St. Columba for Aran, the sorrow with which he quitted its
shores for Iona, the spiritual excellencies which he had therein discovered, are
expressed with singular warmth of religious feeling in a poem written by him on
his departure, which has happily been preserved to us.

“The ancient Life of St. Enda also reckons among the inhabitants of Aran
St. Finnian the elder, the founder of the great school of Clonard, who died in
the second half of the sixth century ; St. Jarlath, the foundgr of the see of Tuam ;
St. MacCreiche, of the race of the men of Corcomroe, who were in possession of
Aran when St. Enda first went thither. The AMartyrology of Donegal makes
mention of St. Guigneus ; the Martyrology of Ai adds St. Papeus, St Kevin of
Glendaloch, St. Carthage of Lismore, St. Lonan Kerr, St. Nechatus or Nechanus,
and St. Libeus, brother of St. Enda. In the midst of this holy brotherhood, .5t.
Enda died in 540 or 542.

“ Among the saints to whom, as we shall soon see, churches were dedicated on
the island, we find St. Benignus of Armagh, who also most probably resided in
Aran, and St. Caradoc, or Carantoc, whose name recalls his British origin. These
two men may fairly be taken as representatives of the native and foreign elements
which at that period went to make up the Irish Church. It is remarkable to find
that on Aran, which seems to have been a common centre for the saints of the
second order, these two elements are found in harmony, and most closely connected
with each other. These facts contrast strangely with what we read in a late
writer, that ‘ the second order of saints do not appear to have had any connection
with Armagh, or the institutions of St. Patrick,’ and that ‘they were connected
with the British Church, and not with the church of St. Patrick.’ The history of
Aran and of its monuments forbids these attempts to disparage the unity of the
ancient Irish Church.

“ The sight of Aran peopled by this host of saints forcibly recalls to mind that
other island, where, in the age of wild and fierce passions, the arts of peace,
religious learning, and the highest Christian virtues, found a sanctuary. At the
beginning of the sixth century, Aran may, with truth, be styled the Lerins of the
northern seas. True, its bare flags and cold grey landscape contrast sadly with
‘the gushing streams, the green meadows, the luxuriant wealth of vines, the fair
valleys, and the fragrant scents which,’ according to St. Eucherius, ‘ made Lerins
the paradise of those who dwelled thereon.’ However, its very wildness did but
make it richer in those attractions so well described by St. Ambrose, which made
the outlying islands so dear to the religious men of that time. They loved those
islands, ‘ which, as a necklace of pearls, God has set upon the bosom of the sea,
and in which those who would fly from the irregular pleasures of the world, may
find a refuge wherein to practise austerity and save themselves from the snares of
this life. he sea that enfolds them becomes, as it were, a veil to hide from
mortal eye their deeds of penance; it aids them to acquire perfect continence; it
feeds grave and sober thought; it has the secret of peace ; and repels all the fierce

axsions of earth. In it these faithful and pious men find incentives to devotion.
he mysterious sound of the billows calls for the answering sound of sacred
psalmody ; and the peaceful voices of holy men, mingled with the gentle murmur of

