--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-212.png ---
186 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

703. Died Colmain M‘Comain.™
755. Died the abbot Goimdibla."
865. Died the abbot Moeltulius, the son of Gobhann.

™ Ann. Munst. ® Act. SS. p. 715.

was most cxcited by a cyclopean house of angular form, which measured from
north to south, 11 feet 8 inches, and 6 feet 10 inches across. It had two
doorways, about 2 feet broad, and 3 thick ; and in one of the chambers there
was a window. The double door is said to be more common in the Aran
cloghauns than in these found elsewhere. One of the chambers in this house
measures 4 feet 9 inches in length, and 4 feet in breadth. The entire
structure has suffered much from exposure. In addition to these separate cells
Dr. Petrie discovered on Aranmore the ruins of a building which would have
been large enough to serve the purpose of a refectory. It is situated near the
churches of St. Colman MacDuach, at Kilmurvey, and is an oval structure,
without cement, of 50 by 37 feet, external measurement, with a wall of 6 feet
in thickness, But it is now full time to bring our wanderings to a close. With
the permission of the excellent and hospitable priest who has charge of the island,
we resolved, on the last morning of our stay on Aran, to celebrate mass in the
ruined church of Teglach-Enda, where, in the year 540 or 542, St. Enda was
interred, and where likewise repose the relics of a countless army of white-robed
saints. The temporary altar was set up under the east window, on the site where
of old the altar stood; and there, in the midst of the loving and simple faithful,
within the walls which had been consecrated some twelve hundred years before,
over the very spot of earth where so many of the saints of Ireland lay awaitin,
their resurrection to glory, the solemn rite of the Christian Sacrifice was performed,
and once more, as in the days of which St. Columba wrote, the angels of God
came down to worship the Divine Victim in the Churches of Aran. And surel’,
not unworthy of the angelic company were the devotion and faith of the humble
worshippers around. Throughout the Mass. a hush and a silence came upon them,
and the only sounds that fell upon the ear was the solemn voice of the priest, or
the murmur of the waves breaking on the beach outside ; but at the moment of
the elevation, when they beheld the pure and holy and unspotted Host raised up
for them to Heaven, a cry of adoring faith and love went forth from their lips, and
every head was bowed to the dust before the Lord.”

We cannot close this note without a short sketch of the life of the great saint
who, whilst our Apostle St. Patrick was still living, laid the foundations of those
monasteries which won for the Aran group the title of ‘‘ Islands of Saints.” The
name of St. Enda is entered in all our Calendars on the 21st of March, The Féliré
of St. AEngus on that day has the following strophe :— c

“‘To the world a great victory was
Benedict, the strong pillar ;
On the same solemnity, with a numerous host,
Enda the illustrious, of Aran,”

And the marginal note is added in the Zeadhar Breac:—“ Enda of Aran was a
reat saint, the son of Conall Derg of the Airghialla ; the daughter of Ainmire,
King of Fir-n-Arda, was his mother.’ Colgan has published the life of the saint,
compiled from more ancient records by Magraidin of Lough Ree, in whose time a
copy of the Gospels that belonged to St. Enda was still preserved in Ly in
Arran, together with a casula wrought in silver and gold. The chief events of St.
Enda’s life are so well set forth in the paper already referred to of the Bishop of
Ardagh, that we take the following extracts from it :— . .
“St. Enda, whose name is written in Irish, Einne and Ende, and in Latin,
Endeus and Enna, was born in Louth about the middle of the fifth century, and
was the only son of Conall, King of Oriel, whose territories included the modern
counties of Louth, Monaghan. Armagh, and Fermanagh. Three of his sisters,
Fanchea, Lochinia, and Carecha, were nuns, and Darenia, the fourth sister, was
wife of Engus, King of Cashel, whose death is placed by the Four Masters in the

