--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-187.png ---
County of Fermanagh. 168

Inis-Eo, or Eonots * Another island in the same lough ; St.
Constans, the son of Fuasclac, who was abbot and anchorite
here, died November 14th, A.D. 777.2 His bones were
translated into a shrine by Matthew, Bishop of Clogher, on the
6th of September, 1308.!

Inis-Mac-Saint ;® An island in Lough-Earn, about half-a-
mile from the shore of the barony of Maghereboy.

* Act. SS. p. 222, * War. Bps. p.183. © Called anciently Inis-mhuighe-samh.

® Iniseo, or Eonois, now Aughnish. There do not seem to be any ancient
remains now existing on this island, which lies in the Upper Lough Erne, in the
parish of Kinawley, and not far from the island called Friar’s Island, in the parish
of Aughalurcher, on which there were ruins within present memory, but which
have now disappeared.

*The Martyrology of Donegal records at 18th January :--‘‘ Ninnidh, Bishop of
Inis-Muighe-Samh, in Loch Eime ; and he was Ninnidh Saebhruisc, who was of
the race of Enda, son of Niall, It was he who was usually called Ninnidh Laim-
hodhan, to my knowledge.—See the Life of Brigid, chap. 41. The Book of
Aymns states that Ninnidh, son of Eochaidh, was Ninnidh Laimhiodhan.”
According to Joyce (/rish Names of Places, 2nd Edition, page 427), the name in
Irish signifies ‘the island of the plain of sorrel,”’ now by a very mispronun-
ciation called Inishmacsaint. The fame of St. Ninnidh, or Nened, who flourished
on the island must, no doubt, have facilitated the change of name. He was a dis-
ciple of St. Finnian of Clonard. and a cotemporary of St. Sinell and St. Columba.
He erected his monastery here before the close of the sixth century, and judging
from the remains of the earth-works and foundations which may yet be traced, it
was of great extent and importance.. The church seems to have been a small
oblong structure. One window remains in a tolerably perfect state. The stone
cross is very rudely cut, and may be as ancient as the time of the saint himself.
To the west and north of the church are mounds of earth, which mark the form
and position of the community-dwellings ; and enclosing all, was a rampart of
mixed earth and stones, which formed a sort of rath, and served the double pur-
pose of enclosure and defence.

Besides his connexion with the present island and parish of Inis-Mac-Saint, on
Lower Lough Erne, St. Ninny must have been connected also in some way with a
widely remote territory on the Upper Lough Erne, where he has given his name to
the barony and remarkable hill oF Knockninny, and where there is still pointed
out a holy well called after the saint. His festival is given in the Calendars on the
16th as well as the 18th January. St. Dianach’s festival is also marked on the
former day. Could they have been the same person? Both are stated to have
been Bishops of Donaghmore Magh-Ene. Besides the place of this name already
alluded to, there is a Donagh in the parish of Galloon, in the plain of the Upper
Lough Erne, on its eastern side, nearly opposite to Knockninny. In this old
burying ground of Donagh (much used to the present day) was an ancient
church.

The survey of County Fermanagh, Ist James I., finds that amongst the spiritual
lands in the barony of Magheryboy, is the parish church of Inismoysoan, having
two quarters of land, and Ball-osey, containing four quarters and a half, being

Patrick O’ Flan: , as corbe.

An Inquisition taken at Eniskilline, 18th SePiemtee 1609, finds that in the
barony of Magheriboy and Twora, is tte parish of Enishmissaugh, wherein is both
@ parson and a viccar collative ; and that the parson paieth yerely to the bushopp
of Clogher, eight shillings, and the viccar, fower shillings, proxies, per annum ;
and that the tithes of the said parish are paid in kinde, one-fourth parte thereof
to the said bushopp of Clogher, one other fourth parte to the said viccar, and
the other two-fourth partes to the parson ; and that the said parson and viccar are
equallie to beare one-third parte of the charge in repairinge and maintaininge
the parish church, and the herenaghe to beare the other two-third partes of the

VoL. 11. _ Mf

