--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-263.png ---
County of Kerry. 235

Here we find an ancient monastery, which was a cell to the
Abbey of Killagh, near Castlemain.* .

4 Smith, p. 177.

to receive a cross. Excepting for the absence of the crosses, this building is as
peace as it was when completed in ages now remote. _In its severe simplicity, it
forms, pethaps, the most interesting as well as one of the most ancient structures
of the more early period of Trish Christian worship.”—( The Life of George Petrie,
by Dr. Stokes, Page 161.) A model of this oratory may be seen in the Museum
of the Royal Irish Academy, and a drawing of it is given in Petrie’s Round
Towers, page 133. The oratory is wholly built of the green stone of the district,
and no cement is used in its structure ; the stones of which it is built are large and
long, being all the same kind in the walls, doorway, window, and roof ; the cell, or
oratory, is itself externally 23 feet long, and is 16 feet high on the outside to the
apex of the pyramid ; its internal breadth is ten feet.

Equally ancient and built in a similar style, though not in such good preser-
vation, is the oratory of Kilmalkedar. It is distant about one mile north from
Gallerus, and lies at the foot of Mount Brandon, near Limerick Harbour. A
drawing of it by Du Noyer will be found in the 7ransactions of the Kilkenny
Archaeological Society for 1864, page 29, That distinguished artist and antiquary
adds that its “gables converge almost as abruptly as the side walls, and in this
respect differs from the oratory at Gallerus. The masonry is formed of large
splintery flakes of the grey grit of the district, the interstices between the stones
being filled with s fragments, the whole most carefully put together and
forming a very solid wall ; a narrow plinth passes along the base of the east gable,
but does not extend to the side walls. The window in the east gable resembles a
narrow flat-headed loop, and is splayed both within and without.” It is a curious
particularity of these oratories, that each of them is surrounded by a number of
primitive houses, which probably were the cells of the monks. Each, too, hasa
monumental stone, inscribed either in the Ogham or the very ancient Roman
ay and presenting an inscribed cross with the name probably of the
founder.

The Kilmalkedar Church is much larger than the oratories, and in its interior
is richly decorated according to the Celtic style. Like most of the primitive Irish
churches, it consists of nave and choir, separated by an arch which is elaborately
ornamented, and in some of its details closely resembles the west door of Ardfert
Cathedral, and the north porch of St. Cormac’s chapel at Cashel. The nave is
26 feet long by 16 wide, and 13 in height to the spring of the roof. The entrance
doorway, which, as usual in early Irish buildings, is in the middle of the west gable,
is formed with an arch in two orders, richly carved, and the archway is filled with
atympanum carried on independent piers. A sufficient portion of the original
roof remains to show that it was originally built of stone, and constructed on the
same Principle as the oratories. This church, though of a very early date, is
probably of later construction than the oratories.

As regards St. Melchedar, to whom this church and the adjoining oratory
were dedicated, his name is entered among the Irish Saints in the Book of Bally-
mote. The following entry in the Martvrology of Donegal, at the 14th of May,
gives some further details :—‘‘ Maolcethair, son of Ronan, son of Uladth, of Cill-
Malchedair, near the shore of the sea to the west of Brandon Hill. He was of the
race of Fiatach Finn, Monarch of Erin,” In a paper read before the R.I.A.,
Archdeacon Rowan, of Kerry, hazarded the conjecture that the person thus
referred to was Mel Brandon O’Ronan, Bishop of Kerry, who died in 1161. The
antiquity, however, of the monuments which bear the saint's name should suffice
to éxplode such a supposition, and I may add that the Afartyrology of Tallaght,
which was composed more than 300 years before that illustrious Bishop of Kerry
was born, registers, on the 14th of May, the name of “ Maelcetair Mac Ronan.”
The original Index of the Martyrology of Donegal adds one small particular
which is full of importance, viz.:—that the name of Maelcetair, son of Ronan, was
expressed in Latin by Mad/egarius: and hence we may, perhaps, be justified in
identifying him with the Irish Saint Madelgarius who is venerated as patron in

