--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-200.png ---
174 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

An Englishman, whose name is not mentioned, was made
abbot in 1268."

Laurence O’Laghtnan was removed from the government
of Boyle to this abbey ; in the year 1290 he was made Bishop
of Kilmacduagh, and died in 1307.°

In 1306, Peter, the son of James Bermingham, brought his

writ against the abbot to suffer him to present a proper
® M Gogh. ° Ann. Laoghkee.

against the English, for which he was expelled by the then existing government

from the Irish House of Commons, on the 22nd of June, 1642. His estate and

castle of Menlough were granted to John Matthews, an English Cromwellian

soldier, and Knockmoy was given to another of the regicide party. The tithes

of Knockmoy were granted to an Englishman named R. Bogle.

1660. On the restoration of King Charles II., Sir Valentine Blake, bart., who
was by right lord of the manor of Knockmoy, was restored his castle of Menlough,
and 2,000 acres of land adjoining thereto, by a clause in the Act of Settlement, but
he did not receive a re-grant for any portion of the lands of Knockmoy,

1668. Sir Walter Blake, knt., the younger brother of Sir Valentine Blake,
bart., of Menlough Castle, mentioned under the year 1652, obtained a patent from
the Crown for part of the ancient manor of Knockmoy, including the venerable
abbey, and the division known as Abbey—namely, Cullagh, four quarters ; the
quarter of the Abbey, and the mills thereupon ; and the quarter of the Nayle,
otherwise Feigh, amounting to 1,372 acres, besides 43 acres in Lissuniskie. How-
ever, though Sir Walter Blake received a patent for this portion of the lands of
his ancestors, the tithes of Killoscobe were not restored to him by the King,
though they had, previous to Cromwell’s time, been the property of his forefathers.
They were granted to the Protestant Church of Tuam.

1677. Nicholas Browne, Esq., received a patent for a portion of the lands of
Knockmoy, namely, Newtewn, 4 quarters, 877 acres; Moyne, 1 quarter, 326
acres; Figh, I quarter, 144 acres ; and Lisniski, 1 quarter and 65 acres ; and also
various other lands,

1737. This year the monks were living at Knockmoy, as appears by a report
made to the Irish House of Commons.

The hill of Knockmoy, which is within a short distance of the abbey, is 557 feet
above the level of the sea, and is called by the try ‘* Knock Rua” (or the
red hill). Nearly on the summit is a ‘bl well” dedicated to St. Bernard.
On every 20th of August tents are pitched on the hill, and multitudes of people
assemble to invoke the intercession of this saint. The fishermen from the Clad-
dagh, at Galway, particularly attend. Relative to the origin of this well, tradition
relates that the night previous to the battle with St. Lawrence, Cathal, the Red-
handed, was in want of water to quench the thirst of his army, caused by the long
march they had made for the purpose of intercepting the Normans. Cathal, who
was always remarkable for his devotion and hi in the aid of Providence, had
recourse to prayer, and the result was that a well sprung up through the rock, and
is never since without a good supply of water.

To the east of the abbey is a well called after the founder, Tubber Cathal (‘.¢.,
Charles's well). To the north is another called ‘‘ Tubber na fion,” formerly said
to have the same effect as wine ; and there is a third called “ Tubber Frinchais,”
believed to possess powerful medicinal qualities.

Forts are very numerous in the neighbourhood of Knockmoy Abbey. There is
a fort or lis on the lands of Cullagh, called Lis na Cinadouna, or the Court of
the People of the World ; and at Cahir Phooka is another called the City of the
Pooka. There was in former times a church or monastery built on part of the
lands of South Cullagh, now called Pullogh. According to tradition, the monks
who commenced the work became so disgusted with the conduct of those who
resided in the neighbourhood, that they abandoned it, and removed to New Castle,
in the parish of Athenry. The foundations can be still traced, and it is also said
that this part of the lands of Knockmoy was called Bally Bernard. At some dis-
tance from this place is a very curious cave.

