--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-184.png ---
158 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

A monastery dedicated to the Nativity of the Virgin Mary,
was founded at Gaula for Dominican friars, by M‘Manus, lord
of the place ; Maguire, the dynast of Fermanagh, contributed
largely to the foundation, and John, the son of the founder,
who had been educated at the Dominican friary of Athenry,
was extremely solicitous in forwarding this work ; some
remains of the monastery are yet to be seen, and particularly
where formerly stood the village of Gola.”

> Burke, pp. 331 and 333.

monastery were in existence ; but when Mr. Wakeman published his work on Lough
Emme in 1870, he writes that not one stone remained above ground. Mr. Wakeman
also writes, that Gola was of ancient foundation—one of those seminaries where,
according to the Venerable Bede. Saxons and other foreigners were so hospitably
entertained, educated, and furnished with books, &c., and all gratuitously, or for
the love of God, by the since libelled “ barbarous Irish ;” and that it was stated
that here Alfred, King of the Northumbrian Saxons, tarried so long that he learned
not only to speak, but to become a bard in the Irish tongue. He then gives the
late Dr. O’Donovan's translation of Alfred’s poem on his experience of Ireland.
Mr, Wakeman, however, gives no authority for the ancient foundation of Gola, or
Alfred’s residence therein ; and it is most likely that any traditions to that effect ~
ought to be referred to Lisgoole, which is partly similar in name, and dates from
the early Irish church.

Gola is not returned in the Great Survey of Fermanagh made at Devenish, 7th
July, 1603, of the temporal and spiritual lands of that county; and in the Inquisi-
tion sped at Enniskillen, 18th September, 1609, to inquire into the ecclesiastical
lands, the only mention of the place is that it was then part of the herenagh lands
of Derrivoruske, now Derrybrusk, in which parish, as previously stated, it is still
situate. It was probably at the time too inconsiderable to excite the cupidity of
the settlers and be formally escheated to the Crown. _It appears from Dr. Burke's
Hibernia Dominicana, p. 332, that in 1660, shortly after the restoration of Charles
IL, the Dominicans being desirous to revive their old houses in Ulster, Father
Dominic O'Connor, of Sligo, sent Father John O’ Hart, the Provincial of the Order,
to restore this monastery and others in Ulster; and that subsequently Fathers
Cathal M‘Manus, then returning from his studies in Italy, and Father Thomas
M‘Mahon, of the Convent of Coleraine, erected a new house near the ancient
monastery, under patronage of Macmanus, likely a descendant of the founder, and
Maguire, Lord Inniskillin, where the society flourished for sometime, and obtained
the friendship of the nobility and people. He writes that the modern founder was
James King, Esquire, but no proprietor of that name appears in the Fermanagh

nquisition. The restoration agrees with the statements in the letters of Primate
Oliver Plunket, as published in the Life of Dr. Plunkett, p. 242, ef seg. A dispute
having arisen between the Dominicans and Franciscans as to the right of soliciting
alms, or questing, as it was called, in the dioceses of Armagh, Down, Dromore,
and Clogher, the decision was referred by Rome in 1671 to the Primate, who
associated with himself as consultors the Most Rev. Patrick Plunket, Bishop of
Meath ; the Very Rev. Oliver Dease, Vicar-General of that diocese; and Dr.
Thomas Fitzsimons, Vicar-General of Kilmore. The Primate made visitations of
the convents in dispute, where, as Dr. Moran writes, the Dominicans, to their
surprise, found that these convents were in the hands of other religious (the Fran-
ciscans), who attempted not only to withhold them, but even controverted their
right to quest. The Primate made his report 18th September, 1672, in favor of the
Dominicans, and in it he refers to Gola, or Gaula, as follows ; and itis deeply
to be regretted, that the ancient Irish annals of Enniskillen, which were adduced
in evidence, are now lost, or their habitat unknown ; as, if extant, we would have
an authentic account of the foundation and history of the house, and much infor-
mation as to the families of MacManus and Maguire, and the countries of which
they were lords :—

“ T went to the diocese of Clogher, and near Enniskillen, in the Convent of the

