--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-267.png ---
County of Kerry. 239

hoe, many of the clergy were slain, and even in their cemetery,
by the M‘Carthys ; but God soon punished this act of impiety
and sacrilege, by bringing many of its authors to an untimely
end:

1191. Died the abbot M‘Mugy.*

1197. Died the Abbot O’Haurehen.!

The same year, on the 19th of December, died Gilla Patrick
O’Huihair, in the 79th year of his age; he was archdeacon of
Faithlin, superior of this convent, and the founder of many
religious houses, to all of which he presented books, vestments,
and all other necessary furniture; he was a celebrated poet,
and was in the highest estimation for his chaste life, piety,
wisdom, and universal charity.™

1198. Died the Abbot O’Kennedy22

1204. The Abbot Ligda, otherwise Niall, died this year of
the plague.

1208. Gillacolman O’Riadan, a reverend priest of the people
of Cloomvama, died in this abbey, where he passed the evening
of a life chequered by misfortune, in penitence and prayer ;
he was interred here?

1320. Dermot M‘Carthy, King of Desmond, being murdered
at Tralee, was interred here, and at the same time O’Donecha
was also interred.9

August 18th, 37th Queen Elizabeth, a grant was made to
Robert Collan of this abbey and its possessions, being three
plowlands, containing 120 acres of arable, with the appurten-
ances, called Manleigh, Aghachurryn, Dems, and Bownrore,
and the advowson of the churches of Kilertee and Kennymora,
in this county; together with the parsonage of Terlogin, and
the presentation to the vicarage thereof; parcel of the abbey
of Donbrodye, half a plowland called Cowlesheine, and
sixty acres of small measure in Cowltevecoroghe, with the
patronage of Kilcornan, all in the county of Limerick, also the
abbey of Irelagh, with its possessions. To hold the same for
ever in fee-farm, by fealty only, in common soccage, and not
in capite, at the annual rent of £72 3s. sterling. Note, in
this grant are included some other townlands besides the
abbey lands.*

The remains of this abbey are very extensive, and its situ-
ation is extremely picturesque.t A small chapel standing at
some distance from the abbey, and which had originally be-
longed to it, is now converted by the noble proprietor into a
banqueting house for the reception of visitors to the romantic
scenes of Killarney.

1 Annoal Munster. * id, \7d, ™ Id, 2 Id, ° Id. Pid, ld.
* Aud Gen, * Smith, p. 128,

