--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-269.png ---
County of Kerry. 241

land or thereabouts, two orchards, and one garden, valued at
.16s. yearly, was granted to Robert Collon.—See the Abbey of
Innisfallen*

Killachad-Conchean ; situated in Corcach-duibhne,’ was
founded by St. Abban in the 6th century, for the holy virgin
St. Conchenna, who is honoured here on the 28th of April.

Killagh ;° or, De Bello Loco, near the river Mang, in the
barony of Trughanackmy.

A priory of regular canons was founded here under the in-
vocation of the Virgin Mary, by Geoffry de Maricis, in the
reign of King. John. The prior of this house was a lord of
Parliament ; but, on account of the very great distance between
his place of residence and the metropolis, he was seldom sum-
moned.* The walls of the church are of a great length, and
strong in proportion ; these, and a noble Gothic east window,
are yet entire. The architecture, which is of a dark marble,

‘ bespeaks the structure to be much more modern than the
time before mentioned. Large possessions, situate in divers
parts of the country, did belong to this house, which were
granted for the term of twenty-one years to Thomas Clinton,
at the annual rent of £17 and 21d.»

An Augustine friary was said by some writers to have been
founded here.°

Lislaghtin ,° in the barony of Iraghticonnor.

® Allemande. Y The barony of Corcaguiny. 2 Act. SS. pp. 615 and 622.
* War. Mon. > Smith, p.150. Auditor-Gen. °° Allemande.

® InIrish Cilefahah. This seems to have been the centre of a religious com-
munity long before the English invasion. It was on the banks of the Mong that
the youthful Mochuda was so enraptured with the chant of the monks, that he
abandoned everything to serve God alone. The O'Gorman MS. having given a
list of several monasteries of Kerry, says:— The founders of the two last
(Irrelagh and: Killamey) were M‘Carthy More and O’Sullivan Beare. I could
never learn who were the founders of the other five, but that it is said that the
family of the Moriarty's built some, particularly that of the aforesaid Cil¢/ahah ;
the rest are supposed to be of the hundred monasteries built by Loanus, disciple
of Comgall of Beanchuir.”

In the same barony of Trughanackmy is the parish of Brusnagh, of which St.
Moling of Luachra, is patron. His holy well is near the churchyard. He was a
native of Sliabh-Luachra, in the neighbourhood. In the parish of Castleisland
there is the ruin of an old church called Cill-Fionain, which honored St. Finan
as patron. There is also the site of an old church in the townland of Kilquan, in
the parish of Ballymacelligot. It was about 30 feet in length and 15 feet in
breadth, but its walls were mercilessly destroyed some years ago. It was
dedicated to the celebrated St. Cuan Airbre, who was the second Abbot of Mothel,
in the Decies, near Carrick-on-Suir,

® This monastery, situate on the Shannon, about a mile from Carrigfoil, was
erected on the site of a more ancient but smaller edifice, founded early in the 7th
century by St. Lachtin, of Bealach-abhra, who died in the year 622, The chapel
of this abbey was divided into a nave and choir, and a square tower was erected
over the’choir arch, ,This abbey and the castle of Carnckaphile, or Carrigfoil,

VOL. 11, B


