--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-185.png ---
, County of Fermanagh. 159

Iniscaoin ;” An island in the great Lough-Earn ; in the early
ages we find an abbey here, of which St. Mochaimoc, the son of
Endeus, was abbot, about the middle of the 7th century ; his
festival is observed 13th of April.¢

, © Act. SS. p. 598.

Franciscan Friars, called the contending parties. The Dominicans adduced the
authority of the ancient annals of that town, written in the Irish language, which

ives the name of the Convent of Gaula, the year in which it was founded, the

ope in whose pontificate it was founded for the Dominicans. They also brought
forward the testimony of an old priest, who swore that he heard from his father
that the Convent of Gaula belonged to the Dominicans ; they also produced other
witnesses who gave like evidence. Now, on the other hand, the Franciscans could
bring forward nothing but negative arguments, that is, the signatures of those who
attested that they had never seen or heard of the Dominicans being in these
convents ; that the people were not able to support both Dominicans and Francis-
cans ; that the secular clergy were opposed to the Dominicans. They went about
seeking the signatures of the gentry and others against the Dominicans ; and, what
is more strange, they even went to Protestant gentlemen asking them to speak to
me against the Dominicans, and, de facto, many of these spoke to me, and almost
threatened me if I did not remove the Dominicans from these dioceses. The
Franciscans, moreover, added, that the Dominicans, in case these convents once
belonged to them, must, nevertheless, have lost their right to them, having aban-
doned and deserted them for many years. so that prescription now holds against
them. The Dominicans, however, replied, that in the time of war, pestilence,
and persecution, no prescription can hold good against those who abandon their
convents.” :

The Franciscans appealed to Rome against the Primate’s judgment, which was
not finally settled till 1678, when it was confirmed by the acts of the Propaganda ;
but in the interim, in the storm of persecution, especially in 1673. all the convents
and novitiates were destroyed, thus for the time putting an end to the controversy.
Eventually, the Convent of Gola was in some degree restored; and here, as we
find from Bishop Burke, were educated Dr. Dominick Maguire, Archbishop of
Armagh, 1681 to 1708; Fathers Gelasius MacMahon, and Antony Maguire, Provin-
cials of the Order. In 1756, Father John Maguire, aged 55. was prior, and Fathers
Thomas Nolan and Antony Maguire brethren.

7 The Survey of Fermanagb 1st James I.. returns as in the half-barony of Cooil,
correctly Coole M‘Kernan, amongst the spiritual lands :—‘‘ The parish church of
Jniskeane, having five quarte-< of land possessed by Munterdoogan as corbes; the
chappell of Popui, alias Collidea, having two tates of land possessed by Gilleroe
O'Haine as corbes ; and the chappell of Maghery ne Cross, having two tates of
lund possessed by Clan M‘Roory as corbes.” This half-barony of Cooile, being
the northern, has been incorporated into the present barony of ‘Tirkennedy. The
ecclesiastical districts of Tniskeane and Popul have been absorbed into the present
civil parish of Enniskillen, the former being represented by the townland of Inis-
keen, containing 260a. 17. 159. ; the la ter by the townland of Pubble, containing
2704. Ir. 209.

In an Inquisition taken at Enishkilline 18th September, 1609, it was found that in
the half-baronies of Cuyle and Tirrecannada (Tirkennedy) was the parish of Enis-
kine, containing én ¢ofo, six ballibetaghs, viz. : Badlieniskine one ballibetagh, Bally-
breaghan and Garvorie one ballibetagh and two tates (now the townland of Garvany,
containing 330. or. 37%. in the civil parirh of Enniskillen), and the three balli-
betaghs and three quarters of Tirecannadz , and that the parish church standeth in
the island of Eniskin: ; and that in the said parish is both a parson and vicar
collative, the tithes being paid in kind, and the parish church repaired as in
Maghcrecoolemanny, that was: the parson and vicar bearing one-third part of the
charge, and the herenagh the other two-third parts; and they also found that the
Bishop of Clogher received yearly, proxies from the said parson, eight shillings,
and from the vicar four shillings, and that to the vicarage belonged half an acre of
glebe ; and it was also found that in the said parish of Eniskine was a chapel of

