--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-216.png ---
190 Ancient Monasteries of Ireland.

Darcy, Lord Justice of Ireland, who surrounded the island
with a fleet consisting of 56 sail.*

® Clyne’s Annals.

and he could find no relief for his anguish but in prayer. The sternness of re-
ligious discipline had not crushed but chastened the tenderness of an affectionate
disposition in St. Enda, any more than in St. Bernard, whose writings are the
truest expression of the best feelings of the religious heart. And as St. Bernard
deplored the loss of his brother Gerard, in whom the active and contemplative
virtues were admirably united, so might St. Enda have spoken of Kieran.
* Whom now shall I consult in doubtful matters? Who will my burdens?
His wise and gentle speech saved me from secular conversation, and gave me to
the silence which I loved. O diligent man! O faithful friend! He plunged
himself in cares that 1 might be spared them. but in this he sought not for his own
advantage, for he expected (such was his humility) more profit from my leisure than
from hisown. Who more strict than he in the preservation of discipline. ? Who
more stern in the chastening of his body? Who more rapt or more sublime in
contemplation ?”

“The last hours pan by St. Kieran on Aran, as described in the ancient Life
of St. Enda, are full of touching incidents, which reveal the tender and simple
affectionateness of those mortified religious. The entire community of the island
shared the sorrow that had come on their venerable abbot. When the moment
of departure was at hand, and the boat that was to bear him from Aran was
spreading its sails to the breeze, Kieran came slowly down to the shore, walking be-
tween St. Enda and St. Finnian, and followed by the entire brotherhood. His tears
flowed fast as he moved along, and those who accompanied him mingled their
tears with his. Peter de Blois, when leaving the Abbey of Croyland to return to
his own country, stayed his steps seven times to look back and contemplate once
again the place where he had been so happy; so, too, did Kieran's gaze linger
with tenderness upon the dark hills of Aran and on the oratories where he had
learned to love God, and to feel how good and joyous a thing it is to dwell with
brethren whose hearts are at one with each other in God. And when the shore
was reached, again he knelt to ask his father’s blessing ; and, entering the boat,
was carried away from the Aran that he was never to see again. The monastic
group stayed fora while on the rocks to follow with longing eyes the bark that
was bearing from them him they loved ; and when, at length, bending their steps
homewards, they had gone some distance from the shore, St. Enda’s tears once
more began to flow. ‘O my brethren,’ cried he, ‘good reason have I to weep,
for this day has our island lost the flower and strength of religious observance.’
What was loss to Aran, however, was gain to Clonmacnoise, and through Clon-
macnoise to the entire Irish Church, to which the venerable monastery on the
Shannon was the source of so many blessings and of so much glory. Those who
admire it even now in its ruins, should not forget that its splendours are reflected
back upon the rocky Aran, where St. Enda formed the spirit of its founder, and
fostered with his blessing the work he had undertaken to accomplish. St.
Kieran died at Clonmacnoise in the year 549, in the prime of life, having
governed his monastery for the short space of a single year.

‘*Next among the saints of Aran comes St. Brendan. _ The life of this illustrious
saint narrates ‘how the man of God went westward with fourteen brethren to a
certain island called Aran, where dwelt St Enda with his brethren. With these
the servant of God, Brendan remained for three days and three nights, after which,
having received the blessing of St. Enda, and of his holy monks, he set out with
his companions for Kerry.’

“St. Finnian of Moville is also mentioned in the ancient life of our saint as one
of St. Enda’s disciples at Aran. This remarkable man was first placed under the
care of St. Colman of Dromore, who flourished about the year 510; but it is
expressly mentioned in the life just quoted, that it was from Aran he set out on
his pilgrimage to Rame. This was probably his first visit to the Apostolic See.
Being of an active temperament. he there devoted himself with great ardour for
several years to the study of the ecclesiastical and apostolical traditions. He then

