--- 7d873ebf-68ba-4f3e-8781-a59f7fa10b49-189.png ---
County of Fermanagh. 163

Lisgool ; On the west bank of the river Earn, near Ennis-
killen.

In the early ages of Christianity, a monastery was founded
here, where we find the festival of St. Aid, or Hugh, of
Lisgovel, was observed 25th of January.”

An abbey, under the invocation of the Virgin Mary, was
afterwards founded here, and probably on the site of the
ancient monastery, for regular canons following the rule of St.
Augustin, by McNoellus Mackenlef, King of Ulster, in the
year 1106."

1287. Matthew McCatasaid was consecrated Bishop of
Clogher, in this abbey.

h 1320. Nicholas McCatasaid was also consecrated bishop
ere.°

1360. This abbey was consumed by fire.?

1380. The prior Domnald ua Unnain died this year.4

™ Vard. Vita Rum. ~.158 °% War. Mon. * King, p.201. ” M‘Geogh.
@ Annal Dungal.

from Kilskerry, on the confines of Fermanagh and Tyrone. The designation of
“Glendorachy,” dark or shady Glen, would accurately describe this ce at the
present day, which is overhung with hills covered with dark heath. is Glen, or
Glendorachy, situated 6 miles north of Enniskillen, is mentioned as the spot
where Ever M‘Mahon was captured by a detachment from the garrison of that
town on his flight from Letterkenny. The entire parish of Kilskeery, containing
20,4362. Ir, 279., is altogether in the barony of East Omagh, in the present County
Tyrone, no. portion thereof being in Fermanagh.

This parish contains Trelic, ‘‘the three stones,” now Trillick, where, according
to Conry, there was an abbey at 613. The Martyrology of Donegal has, at
2gth May, St. Mobecce, at Trelic ; and the Four Masters at A.C. 809 (recte 814),
record the death of Cinardh, son of Ceallach, Bishop and Airchinneach of Trelecc.
O'Donovan, in his note on this passage writes, that the Annals of Ulster at 813,
call it Trelic-moer. Joyce, in his admirable work, /riskh Names of Places, second
Edition, p. 252, in writing of the triple combinations in the names of places,
quoting fom the Book of Lismore, observes that Duntryleague, near Galbally,
in County Limerick owes the origin of the name to the fact, that when Cormac
Cas, King of Munster, was dying, his attendants placed him in a Dus, with three
Giagars (pillar stones) around it, on which was laid the bed of the King, so that
his head was in the middle between the three pillars. He died there, and was
buried in a cave within the dus ; and from that arose the name of the place,
Dun-tri-liag, the fortress of the three pillar stones. He further observes that
a similar erection of three stones must have been very usual, as we find several
names containing the compound #i-/iag, and simply in the form of Trillick, the
name of a village in Tyrone, and of two townlands—one in Donegal, and the
other in Fermanagh.

The parish priest of Kilskerry in 1704 was Bryan O’Kerulan, aged 45, who had
received Holy Orders in April, 1688, in Kilkenny, from Dr. James Phelan,
Bishop of Ossory. = Fi th J

Lisgoole, in Irish Lis-gabhail. The Martyrology of Donegal, at 25) fanuary,
reserves the memory of Fe. Aedh, Bishop of otha on Loch Eire.” e

S. Martyrology of Tallaght has, on the same day, ‘‘ Sancti Aedha Episcopi.”
Duald Mac Finis in his Tract on Certain Bishops of Ireland. gives, under the
heading of Gobhuil, two bishops, viz., ‘‘Guaire, Bishop of the Gobhuil : and
Aodh (4.2., Hugh), Bishop of Lisgabhuil, on Loch Eme, 25th January.” The
mounds which mark this district prove it to have been a secure place of refuge,
and it is probable that its monastery was founded at a very early period. It

